ALAN LIGHTMAN
EINSTEIN’S DREAMS
Alan Lightman was born in Memphis,
Tennessee, in 1948 and educated at
Princeton and at the California Institute
of Technology, where he received a
Ph.D. in theoretical physics. His research papers in physics have appeared
in numerous scientific journals. His essays and reviews have appeared in The
Atlantic, Harper’s, The New Yorker, The

3/203

New York Review of Books, and other
magazines. He is the author of a dozen
books, including two collections of essays, Dance for Two and A Sense of the
Mysterious, and four novels, Einstein’s
Dreams, Good Benito, The Diagnosis, and
Reunion. Einstein’s Dreams was an international bestseller and The Diagnosis
was a finalist for the 2000 National
Book Award in fiction. Lightman has
served on the faculties of Harvard
University and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he is currently an adjunct professor of
humanities.

ALSO BY ALAN LIGHTMAN

Good Benito
Dance for Two: Selected Essays
The Diagnosis
Reunion

FIRST VINTAGE CONTEMPORARIES EDITION,
NOVEMBER 2004
Copyright © 1993 by Alan Lightman
Illustrations copyright © 1993 by Chris Costello
All rights reserved under International and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. Published in
the United States by Vintage Books, a division
of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of
Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published
in hardcover in the United States by Pantheon
Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York, in 1993.
Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks and Vintage Contemporaries is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

7/203

The Library of Congress has cataloged the Pantheon edition as follows:
Lightman, Alan P., 1948–
Einstein’s dreams / Alan Lightman.
p. cm.
1. Einstein, Albert. 1879–1955—Fiction. I.
Title.
PS3562.I45397E38 1993
813′.54—dc20 92-50465
eISBN: 978-0-307-78974-7
www.vintagebooks.com
v3.1

Contents

Cover
About the Author
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright

Prologue
14 April 1905
16 April 1905
19 April 1905
24 April 1905
26 April 1905
28 April 1905
3 May 1905
4 May 1905

9/203

Interlude
8 May 1905
10 May 1905
11 May 1905
14 May 1905
15 May 1905
20 May 1905
22 May 1905
29 May 1905
Interlude
2 June 1905
3 June 1905
5 June 1905
9 June 1905
10 June 1905
11 June 1905
15 June 1905
17 June 1905
Interlude

10/203

18 June 1905
20 June 1905
22 June 1905
25 June 1905
27 June 1905
28 June 1905
Epilogue

• PROLOGUE

In some distant arcade, a clock tower
calls out six times and then stops. The
young man slumps at his desk. He has
come to the office at dawn, after another upheaval. His hair is uncombed and
his trousers are too big. In his hand he
holds twenty crumpled pages, his new
theory of time, which he will mail
today to the German journal of physics.
Tiny sounds from the city drift
through the room. A milk bottle clinks

12/203

on a stone. An awning is cranked in a
shop on Marktgasse. A vegetable cart
moves slowly through a street. A man
and woman talk in hushed tones in an
apartment nearby.
In the dim light that seeps through
the room, the desks appear shadowy
and soft, like large sleeping animals.
Except for the young man’s desk, which
is cluttered with half-opened books, the
twelve oak desks are all neatly covered
with documents, left from the previous
day. Upon arriving in two hours, each
clerk will know precisely where to begin. But at this moment, in this dim
light, the documents on the desks are
no more visible than the clock in the
corner or the secretary’s stool near the
door. All that can be seen at this moment are the shadowy shapes of the
desks and the hunched form of the
young man.

13/203

Ten minutes past six, by the invisible
clock on the wall. Minute by minute,
new objects gain form. Here, a brass
wastebasket appears. There, a calendar
on a wall. Here, a family photograph, a
box of paper clips, an inkwell, a pen.
There, a typewriter, a jacket folded on
a chair. In time, the ubiquitous bookshelves emerge from the night mist that
hangs on the walls. The bookshelves
hold notebooks of patents. One patent
concerns a new drilling gear with teeth
curved in a pattern to minimize friction. Another proposes an electrical
transformer that holds constant voltage
when the power supply varies. Another
describes a typewriter with a low-velocity typebar that eliminates noise. It is
a room full of practical ideas.
Outside, the tops of the Alps start to
glow from the sun. It is late June. A
boatman on the Aare unties his small

14/203

skiff and pushes off, letting the current
take him along Aarstrasse to Gerberngasse, where he will deliver his
summer apples and berries. The baker
arrives at his store on Marktgasse, fires
his coal oven, begins mixing flour and
yeast. Two lovers embrace on the Nydegg Bridge, gaze wistfully into the river
below. A man stands on his balcony on
Schifflaube, studies the pink sky. A woman who cannot sleep walks slowly
down Kramgasse, peering into each
dark arcade, reading the posters in
halflight.
In the long, narrow office on Speichergasse, the room full of practical ideas,
the young patent clerk still sprawls in
his chair, head down on his desk. For
the past several months, since the
middle of April, he has dreamed many
dreams about time. His dreams have
taken hold of his research. His dreams

15/203

have worn him out, exhausted him so
that he sometimes cannot tell whether
he is awake or asleep. But the dreaming
is finished. Out of many possible
natures of time, imagined in as many
nights, one seems compelling. Not that
the others are impossible. The others
might exist in other worlds.
The young man shifts in his chair,
waiting for the typist to come, and
softly hums from Beethoven’s Moonlight
Sonata.

• 14 APRIL 1905

Suppose time is a circle, bending back
on itself. The world repeats itself, precisely, endlessly.
For the most part, people do not
know they will live their lives over.
Traders do not know that they will
make the same bargain again and
again. Politicians do not know that they
will shout from the same lectern an infinite number of times in the cycles of
time. Parents treasure the first laugh

17/203

from their child as if they will not hear
it again. Lovers making love the first
time undress shyly, show surprise at the
supple thigh, the fragile nipple. How
would they know that each secret
glimpse, each touch, will be repeated
again and again and again, exactly as
before?
On Marktgasse, it is the same. How
could the shopkeepers know that each
handmade sweater, each embroidered
handkerchief, each chocolate candy,
each intricate compass and watch will
return to their stalls? At dusk, the shopkeepers go home to their families or
drink beer in the taverns, calling happily to friends down the vaulted alleys,
caressing each moment as an emerald
on temporary consignment. How could
they know that nothing is temporary,
that all will happen again? No more
than an ant crawling round the rim of a

18/203

crystal chandelier knows that it will return to where it began.
In the hospital on Gerberngasse, a
woman says goodbye to her husband.
He lies in bed and stares at her emptily.
In the last two months, his cancer has
spread from his throat to his liver, his
pancreas, his brain. His two young children sit on one chair in the corner of
the room, frightened to look at their
father, his sunken cheeks, the withered
skin of an old man. The wife comes to
the bed and kisses her husband softly
on the forehead, whispers goodbye, and
quickly leaves with the children. She is
certain that this was the last kiss. How
could she know that time will begin
again, that she will be born again, will
study at the gymnasium again, will
show her paintings at the gallery in
Zürich, will again meet her husband in
the small library in Fribourg, will again

19/203

go sailing with him in Thun Lake on a
warm day in July, will give birth again,
that her husband will again work for
eight years at the pharmaceutical and
come home one evening with a lump in
his throat, will again throw up and get
weak and end up in this hospital, this
room, this bed, this moment. How
could she know?
In the world in which time is a circle,
every handshake, every kiss, every
birth, every word, will be repeated precisely. So too every moment that two
friends stop becoming friends, every
time that a family is broken because of
money, every vicious remark in an argument between spouses, every opportunity denied because of a superior’s
jealousy, every promise not kept.
And just as all things will be repeated
in the future, all things now happening
happened a million times before. Some

20/203

few people in every town, in their
dreams, are vaguely aware that all has
occurred in the past. These are the
people with unhappy lives, and they
sense that their misjudgments and
wrong deeds and bad luck have all
taken place in the previous loop of
time. In the dead of night these cursed
citizens wrestle with their bedsheets,
unable to rest, stricken with the knowledge that they cannot change a single
action, a single gesture. Their mistakes
will be repeated precisely in this life as
in the life before. And it is these double
unfortunates who give the only sign
that time is a circle. For in each town,
late at night, the vacant streets and balconies fill up with their moans.

• 16 APRIL 1905

In this world, time is like a flow of water, occasionally displaced by a bit of
debris, a passing breeze. Now and then,
some cosmic disturbance will cause a
rivulet of time to turn away from the
mainstream, to make connection backstream. When this happens, birds, soil,
people caught in the branching tributary find themselves suddenly carried
to the past.

22/203

Persons who have been transported
back in time are easy to identify. They
wear dark, indistinct clothing and walk
on their toes, trying not to make a
single sound, trying not to bend a
single blade of grass. For they fear that
any change they make in the past could
have drastic consequences for the
future.
Just now, for example, such a person
is crouching in the shadows of the arcade, at no. 19 Kramgasse. An odd
place for a traveler from the future, but
there she is. Pedestrians pass, stare, and
walk on. She huddles in a corner, then
quickly creeps across the street and
cowers in another darkened spot, at no.
22. She is terrified that she will kick up
dust, just as a Peter Klausen is making
his way to the apothecary on Spitalgasse this afternoon of 16 April 1905.
Klausen is something of a dandy and

23/203

hates to have his clothes sullied. If dust
messes his clothes, he will stop and
painstakingly brush them off, regardless
of waiting appointments. If Klausen is
sufficiently delayed, he may not buy
the ointment for his wife, who has been
complaining of leg aches for weeks. In
that case, Klausen’s wife, in a bad humor, may decide not to make the trip to
Lake Geneva. And if she does not go to
Lake Geneva on 23 June 1905, she will
not meet a Catherine d’Épinay walking
on the jetty of the east shore and will
not introduce Mlle. d’Épinay to her son
Richard. In turn, Richard and Catherine
will not marry on 17 December 1908,
will not give birth to Friedrich on 8
July 1912. Friedrich Klausen will not
be father to Hans Klausen on 22 August
1938, and without Hans Klausen the
European Union of 1979 will never
occur.

24/203

The woman from the future, thrust
without warning into this time and this
place and now attempting to be invisible in her darkened spot at no. 22
Kramgasse, knows the Klausen story
and a thousand other stories waiting to
unfold, dependent on the births of children, the movement of people in the
streets, the songs of birds at certain moments, the precise position of chairs,
the wind. She crouches in the shadows
and does not return the stares of
people. She crouches and waits for the
stream of time to carry her back to her
own time.
When a traveler from the future must
talk, he does not talk but whimpers. He
whispers tortured sounds. He is agonized. For if he makes the slightest alteration in anything, he may destroy the
future. At the same time, he is forced to
witness events without being part of

25/203

them, without changing them. He envies the people who live in their own
time, who can act at will, oblivious of
the future, ignorant of the effects of
their actions. But he cannot act. He is
an inert gas, a ghost, a sheet without
soul. He has lost his personhood. He is
an exile of time.
Such wretched people from the future can be found in every village and
every town, hiding under the eaves of
buildings, in basements, under bridges,
in deserted fields. They are not questioned about coming events, about future marriages, births, finances, inventions, profits to be made. Instead, they
are left alone and pitied.

• 19 APRIL 1905

It is a cold morning in November and
the first snow has fallen. A man in a
long leather coat stands on his fourthfloor balcony on Kramgasse overlooking the Zähringer Fountain and the
white street below. To the east, he can
see the fragile steeple of St. Vincent’s
Cathedral, to the west, the curved roof
of the Zytgloggeturm. But the man is
not looking east or west. He is staring
down at a tiny red hat left in the snow

27/203

below, and he is thinking. Should he go
to the woman’s house in Fribourg? His
hands grip the metal balustrade, let go,
grip again. Should he visit her? Should
he visit her?
He decides not to see her again. She
is manipulative and judgmental, and
she could make his life miserable. Perhaps she would not be interested in him
anyway. So he decides not to see her
again. Instead, he keeps to the company
of men. He works hard at the pharmaceutical, where he hardly notices the female assistant manager. He goes to the
brasserie on Kochergasse in the evenings with his friends and drinks beer,
he learns to make fondue. Then, in
three years, he meets another woman
in a clothing shop in Neuchâtel. She is
nice. She makes love to him very very
slowly, over a period of months. After a
year, she comes to live with him in

28/203

Berne. They live quietly, take walks together along the Aare, are companions
to each other, grow old and contented.
In the second world, the man in the
long leather coat decides that he must
see the Fribourg woman again. He
hardly knows her, she could be manipulative, and her movements hint at
volatility, but that way her face softens
when she smiles, that laugh, that clever
use of words. Yes, he must see her
again. He goes to her house in Fribourg, sits on the couch with her, within moments feels his heart pounding,
grows weak at the sight of the white of
her arms. They make love, loudly and
with passion. She persuades him to
move to Fribourg. He leaves his job in
Berne and begins work at the Fribourg
Post Bureau. He burns with his love for
her. Every day he comes home at noon.
They eat, they make love, they argue,

29/203

she complains that she needs more
money, he pleads with her, she throws
pots at him, they make love again, he
returns to the Post Bureau. She
threatens to leave him, but she does not
leave him. He lives for her, and he is
happy with his anguish.
In the third world, he also decides
that he must see her again. He hardly
knows her, she could be manipulative,
and her movements hint at volatility,
but that smile, that laugh, that clever
use of words. Yes, he must see her
again. He goes to her house in Fribourg, meets her at the door, has tea
with her at her kitchen table. They talk
of her work at the library, his job at the
pharmaceutical. After an hour, she says
that she must leave to help a friend, she
says goodbye to him, they shake hands.
He travels the thirty kilometers back to
Berne, feels empty during the train ride

30/203

home, goes to his fourth-floor apartment on Kramgasse, stands on the balcony and stares down at the tiny red
hat left in the snow.
These three chains of events all indeed happen, simultaneously. For in
this world, time has three dimensions,
like space. Just as an object may move
in three perpendicular directions, corresponding to horizontal, vertical, and
longitudinal, so an object may participate in three perpendicular futures. Each
future moves in a different direction of
time. Each future is real. At every point
of decision, whether to visit a woman
in Fribourg or to buy a new coat, the
world splits into three worlds, each
with the same people but with different
fates for those people. In time, there are
an infinity of worlds.
Some make light of decisions, arguing that all possible decisions will

31/203

occur. In such a world, how could one
be responsible for his actions? Others
hold that each decision must be considered and committed to, that without
commitment there is chaos. Such
people are content to live in contradictory worlds, so long as they know the
reason for each.

• 24 APRIL 1905

In this world, there are two times.
There is mechanical time and there is
body time. The first is as rigid and
metallic as a massive pendulum of iron
that swings back and forth, back and
forth, back and forth. The second
squirms and wriggles like a bluefish in
a bay. The first is unyielding, predetermined. The second makes up its mind
as it goes along.

33/203

Many are convinced that mechanical
time does not exist. When they pass the
giant clock on the Kramgasse they do
not see it; nor do they hear its chimes
while sending packages on Postgasse or
strolling between flowers in the Rosengarten. They wear watches on their
wrists, but only as ornaments or as
courtesies to those who would give
timepieces as gifts. They do not keep
clocks in their houses. Instead, they
listen to their heartbeats. They feel the
rhythms of their moods and desires.
Such people eat when they are hungry,
go to their jobs at the millinery or the
chemist’s whenever they wake from
their sleep, make love all hours of the
day. Such people laugh at the thought
of mechanical time. They know that
time moves in fits and starts. They
know that time struggles forward with
a weight on its back when they are

34/203

rushing an injured child to the hospital
or bearing the gaze of a neighbor
wronged. And they know too that time
darts across the field of vision when
they are eating well with friends or receiving praise or lying in the arms of a
secret lover.
Then there are those who think their
bodies don’t exist. They live by mechanical time. They rise at seven o’clock
in the morning. They eat their lunch at
noon and their supper at six. They arrive at their appointments on time, precisely by the clock. They make love
between eight and ten at night. They
work forty hours a week, read the
Sunday paper on Sunday, play chess on
Tuesday nights. When their stomach
growls, they look at their watch to see
if it is time to eat. When they begin to
lose themselves in a concert, they look
at the clock above the stage to see

35/203

when it will be time to go home. They
know that the body is not a thing of
wild magic, but a collection of chemicals, tissues, and nerve impulses.
Thoughts are no more than electrical
surges in the brain. Sexual arousal is no
more than a flow of chemicals to certain nerve endings. Sadness no more
than a bit of acid transfixed in the cerebellum. In short, the body is a machine,
subject to the same laws of electricity
and mechanics as an electron or clock.
As such, the body must be addressed in
the language of physics. And if the
body speaks, it is the speaking only of
so many levers and forces. The body is
a thing to be ordered, not obeyed.
Taking the night air along the river
Aare, one sees evidence for two worlds
in one. A boatman gauges his position
in the dark by counting seconds drifted
in the water’s current. “One, three

36/203

meters. Two, six meters. Three, nine
meters.” His voice cuts through the
black in clean and certain syllables.
Beneath a lamppost on the Nydegg
Bridge, two brothers who have not seen
each other for a year stand and drink
and laugh. The bell of St. Vincent’s
Cathedral sings ten times. In seconds,
lights in the apartments lining Schifflaube wink out, in a perfect mechanized response, like the deductions of
Euclid’s geometry. Lying on the riverbank, two lovers look up lazily,
awakened from a timeless sleep by the
distant church bells, surprised to find
that night has come.
Where the two times meet, desperation. Where the two times go their separate ways, contentment. For, miraculously, a barrister, a nurse, a baker can
make a world in either time, but not in

37/203

both times. Each time is true, but the
truths are not the same.

• 26 APRIL 1905

In this world, it is instantly obvious
that something is odd. No houses can
be seen in the valleys or plains. Everyone lives in the mountains.
At some time in the past, scientists
discovered that time flows more slowly
the farther from the center of earth.
The effect is minuscule, but it can be
measured with extremely sensitive instruments. Once the phenomenon was
known, a few people, anxious to stay

39/203

young, moved to the mountains. Now
all houses are built on Dom, the Matterhorn, Monte Rosa, and other high
ground. It is impossible to sell living
quarters elsewhere.
Many are not content simply to locate their homes on a mountain. To get
the maximum effect, they have constructed their houses on stilts. The
mountaintops all over the world are
nested with such houses, which from a
distance look like a flock of fat birds
squatting on long skinny legs. People
most eager to live longest have built
their houses on the highest stilts.
Indeed, some houses rise half a mile
high on their spindly wooden legs.
Height has become status. When a person from his kitchen window must look
up to see a neighbor, he believes that
neighbor will not become stiff in the
joints as soon as he, will not lose his

40/203

hair until later, will not wrinkle until
later, will not lose the urge for romance
as early. Likewise, a person looking
down on another house tends to dismiss
its occupants as spent, weak, and shortsighted. Some boast that they have
lived their whole lives high up, that
they were born in the highest house on
the highest mountain peak and have
never descended. They celebrate their
youth in their mirrors and walk naked
on their balconies.
Now and then some urgent business
forces people to come down from their
houses, and they do so with haste, hurrying down their tall ladders to the
ground, running to another ladder or to
the valley below, completing their
transactions, and then returning as
quickly as possible to their houses, or
to other high places. They know that
with each downward step, time passes

41/203

just a little bit faster and they age a
little more quickly. People at ground
level never sit. They run, while carrying
their briefcases or groceries.
A small number of residents in each
city have stopped caring whether they
age a few seconds faster than their
neighbors. These adventuresome souls
come down to the lower world for days
at a time, lounge under the trees that
grow in the valleys, swim leisurely in
the lakes that lie at warmer altitudes,
roll on level ground. They hardly look
at their watches and cannot tell you if
it is Monday or Thursday. When the
others rush by them and scoff, they just
smile.
In time, people have forgotten the
reason why higher is better. Nonetheless, they continue to live on the mountains, to avoid sunken regions as much
as they can, to teach their children to

42/203

shun other children from low elevations. They tolerate the cold of the
mountains by habit and enjoy the discomfort as part of their breeding. They
have even convinced themselves that
thin air is good for their bodies and,
following that logic, have gone on
spare diets, refusing all but the most
gossamer food. At length, the populace
have become thin like the air, bony, old
before their time.

• 28 APRIL 1905

One cannot walk down an avenue, converse with a friend, enter a building,
browse beneath the sandstone arches of
an old arcade without meeting an instrument of time. Time is visible in all
places. Clock towers, wristwatches,
church bells divide years into months,
months into days, days into hours,
hours into seconds, each increment of
time marching after the other in perfect
succession. And beyond any particular

44/203

clock, a vast scaffold of time, stretching
across the universe, lays down the law
of time equally for all. In this world, a
second is a second is a second. Time
paces forward with exquisite regularity,
at precisely the same velocity in every
corner of space. Time is an infinite
ruler. Time is absolute.
Every afternoon, the townspeople of
Berne convene at the west end of Kramgasse. There, at four minutes to three,
the Zytgloggeturm pays tribute to time.
High on the turret of the tower clowns
dance, roosters crow, bears play fife
and drum, their mechanical movements
and sounds synchronized exactly by the
turning of gears, which, in turn, are inspired by the perfection of time. At
three o’clock precisely, a massive bell
chimes three times, people verify their
watches and then return to their offices
on Speichergasse, their shops on

45/203

Marktgasse, their farms beyond the
bridges on the Aare.
Those of religious faith see time as
the evidence for God. For surely nothing could be created perfect without a
Creator. Nothing could be universal and
not be divine. All absolutes are part of
the One Absolute. And wherever absolutes, so too time. Thus the philosophers of ethics have placed time at the
center of their belief. Time is the reference against which all actions are
judged. Time is the clarity for seeing
right and wrong.
In a linen shop on Amthausgasse, a
woman talks with her friend. She has
just lost her job. For twenty years she
worked as a clerk in the Bundeshaus,
recording debates. She has supported
her family. Now, with a daughter still
in school and a husband who spends
two hours each morning on the toilet,

46/203

she has been fired. Her administrator, a
heavily oiled and grotesque lady, came
in one morning and told her to clear
out her desk by the following day. The
friend in the shop listens quietly, neatly
folds the tablecloth she has purchased,
picks lint off the sweater of the woman
who has just lost her job. The two
friends agree to meet for tea at ten
o’clock the next morning. Ten o’clock.
Seventeen hours and fifty-three minutes
from this moment. The woman who has
just lost her job smiles for the first time
in days. In her mind she imagines the
clock on the wall in her kitchen, ticking
off each second between now and tomorrow at ten, without interruption,
without consultation. And a similar
clock in the home of her friend, synchronized. At twenty minutes to ten tomorrow morning, the woman will put
on her scarf and her gloves and her

47/203

coat and walk down the Schifflaube,
past the Nydegg Bridge and on to the
tea shop on Postgasse. Across town, at
fifteen minutes before ten, her friend
will leave her own house on Zeughausgasse and make her way to the same
place. At ten o’clock they will meet.
They will meet at ten o’clock.
A world in which time is absolute is a
world of consolation. For while the
movements of people are unpredictable, the movement of time is predictable. While people can be doubted,
time cannot be doubted. While people
brood, time skips ahead without looking back. In the coffeehouses, in the
government buildings, in boats on Lake
Geneva, people look at their watches
and take refuge in time. Each person
knows that somewhere is recorded the
moment she was born, the moment she
took her first step, the moment of her

48/203

first passion, the moment she said
goodbye to her parents.

• 3 May 1905

Consider a world in which cause and
effect are erratic. Sometimes the first
precedes the second, sometimes the
second the first. Or perhaps cause lies
forever in the past while effect in the
future, but future and past are
entwined.
On the terrace of the Bundesterrasse
is a striking view: the river Aare below
and the Bernese Alps above. A man
stands there just now, absently

50/203

emptying his pockets and weeping.
Without reason, his friends have abandoned him. No one calls any more, no
one meets him for supper or beer at the
tavern, no one invites him to their
home. For twenty years he has been the
ideal friend to his friends, generous,
interested, soft-spoken, affectionate.
What could have happened? A week
from this moment on the terrace, the
same man begins acting the goat, insulting everyone, wearing smelly
clothes, stingy with money, allowing no
one to come to his apartment on
Laupenstrasse. Which was cause and
which effect, which future and which
past?
In Zürich, strict laws have recently
been approved by the Council. Pistols
may not be sold to the public. Banks
and trading houses must be audited. All
visitors, whether entering Zürich by

51/203

boat on the river Limmat or by rail on
the Selnau line, must be searched for
contraband. The civil military is
doubled. One month after the crackdown, Zürich is ripped by the worst
crimes in its history. In daylight, people
are murdered in the Weinplatz, paintings are stolen from the Kunsthaus, liquor is drunk in the pews of the Münsterhof. Are these criminal acts not misplaced in time? Or perhaps the new
laws were action rather than reaction?
A young woman sits near a fountain
in the Botanischer Garten. She comes
here every Sunday to smell the white
double violets, the musk rose, the matted pink gillyflowers. Suddenly, her
heart soars, she blushes, she paces
anxiously, she becomes happy for no
reason. Days later, she meets a young
man and is smitten with love. Are the
two events not connected? But by what

52/203

bizarre connection, by what twist in
time, by what reversed logic?
In this acausal world, scientists are
helpless. Their predictions become
postdictions. Their equations become
justifications, their logic, illogic. Scientists turn reckless and mutter like gamblers who cannot stop betting. Scientists are buffoons, not because they are
rational but because the cosmos is irrational. Or perhaps it is not because the
cosmos is irrational but because they
are rational. Who can say which, in an
acausal world?
In this world, artists are joyous. Unpredictability is the life of their paintings, their music, their novels. They delight in events not forecasted, happenings without explanation, retrospective.
Most people have learned how to live
in the moment. The argument goes that
if the past has uncertain effect on the

53/203

present, there is no need to dwell on
the past. And if the present has little effect on the future, present actions need
not be weighed for their consequence.
Rather, each act is an island in time, to
be judged on its own. Families comfort
a dying uncle not because of a likely inheritance, but because he is loved at
that moment. Employees are hired not
because of their résumés, but because
of their good sense in interviews. Clerks
trampled by their bosses fight back at
each insult, with no fear for their future. It is a world of impulse. It is a
world of sincerity. It is a world in
which every word spoken speaks just to
that moment, every glance given has
only one meaning, each touch has no
past or no future, each kiss is a kiss of
immediacy.

• 4 May 1905

It is evening. Two couples, Swiss and
English, sit at their usual table in the
dining room of the Hotel San Murezzan
in St. Moritz. They meet here yearly,
for the month of June, to socialize and
take the waters. The men are handsome
in their black ties and their cummerbunds, the women beautiful in their
evening gowns. The waiter walks across
the fine wood floor, takes their orders.

55/203

“I gather the weather will be fair tomorrow,” says the woman with the brocade in her hair. “That will be a relief.”
The others nod. “The baths do seem so
much more pleasant when it’s sunny.
Although I suppose it shouldn’t
matter.”
“Running Lightly is four-to-one in
Dublin,” says the admiral. “I’d back
him if I had the money.” He winks at
his wife.
“I’ll give you five-to-one if you’re
game,” says the other man.
The women break their dinner rolls,
butter them, carefully place their
knives on the side of the butter plates.
The men keep their eyes on the
entrance.
“I love the lace of the serviettes,”
says the woman with the brocade in
her hair. She takes her napkin and unfolds it, then folds it again.

56/203

“You say that every year, Josephine,”
the other woman says and smiles.
Dinner comes. Tonight, they dine on
lobster Bordelaise, asparagus, steak,
white wine.
“How is yours done?” says the woman with the brocade, looking at her
husband.
“Splendidly. And yours?”
“A bit spicy. Like last week’s.”
“And, Admiral, how’s the steak?”
“Never turned down a side of beef,”
says the admiral happily.
“Wouldn’t notice you’ve been at the
larder much,” says the other man.
“You’ve not put on one kilo since last
year, or even for the last ten.”
“Perhaps you can’t notice, but she
can,” says the admiral, and winks at his
wife.
“I may be mistaken, but it seems the
rooms are a bit draftier this year,” says

57/203

the admiral’s wife. The others nod, continue eating the lobster and the steak.
“I always sleep best in cool rooms, but
if it’s drafty I wake up with a cough.”
“Put the sheet over your head,” says
the other woman.
The admiral’s wife says yes but looks
puzzled.
“Tuck your head under the sheet and
the draft won’t bother you,” repeats the
other woman. “It happens to me all the
time in Grindelwald. I have a window
by my bed. I can leave it open if I put
the sheet over my nose. Keeps the cold
air out.”
The woman with the brocade shifts
in her chair, uncrosses her legs beneath
the table.
Coffee comes. The men retire to the
smoking room, the women to the wicker swing on the great deck outside.

58/203

“And how’s the business since last
year?” asks the admiral.
“Can’t complain,” says the other
man, sipping his brandy.
“The children?”
“Grown a year.”
On the porch, the women swing and
look into the night.
And it is just the same in every hotel,
in every house, in every town. For in
this world, time does pass, but little
happens. Just as little happens from
year to year, little happens from month
to month, day to day. If time and the
passage of events are the same, then
time moves barely at all. If time and
events are not the same, then it is only
people who barely move. If a person
holds no ambitions in this world, he
suffers unknowingly. If a person holds
ambitions, he suffers knowingly, but
very slowly.

59/203

• INTERLUDE

Einstein and Besso walk slowly down
Speichergasse in the late afternoon. It is
a quiet time of day. Shopkeepers are
dropping their awnings and getting out
their bicycles. From a second-floor window, a mother calls to her daughter to
come home and prepare dinner.
Einstein has been explaining to his
friend Besso why he wants to know
time. But he says nothing of his dreams.
Soon they will be at Besso’s house.

61/203

Sometimes Einstein stays there through
dinner, and Mileva has to come get
him, toting their infant. That usually
happens when Einstein is possessed
with a new project, as he is now, and
all through dinner he twitches his leg
under the table. Einstein isn’t good dinner company.
Einstein leans over to Besso, who is
also short, and says, “I want to understand time because I want to get close
to The Old One.”
Besso nods in accord. But there are
problems, which Besso points out. For
one, perhaps The Old One is not interested in getting close to his creations,
intelligent or not. For another, it is not
obvious that knowledge is closeness.
For yet another, this time project could
be too big for a twenty-six-year-old.
On the other hand, Besso thinks that
his friend might be capable of anything.

62/203

Already this year, Einstein has completed his Ph.D. thesis, finished one paper on photons and another on Brownian motion. The current project actually
began as an investigation of electricity
and magnetism, which, Einstein suddenly announced one day, would require a reconception of time. Besso is
dazzled by Einstein’s ambition.
For a while, Besso leaves Einstein
alone with his thoughts. He wonders
what Anna has cooked for dinner and
looks down a side street where a silver
boat on the Aare glints in the low sun.
As the two men walk, their footsteps
softly click on the cobblestones. They
have known each other since their student days in Zürich.
“Got a letter from my brother in
Rome,” says Besso. “He’s coming to visit for a month. Anna likes him because
he always compliments her figure.”

63/203

Einstein smiles absently. “I won’t be
able to see you after work while my
brother is here. Will you be all right?”
“What?” asks Einstein.
“I won’t be able to see you much
while my brother is here,” repeats
Besso. “Will you be all right by
yourself?”
“Sure,” says Einstein. “Don’t worry
about me.”
Ever since Besso has known him, Einstein has been self-sufficient. His family
moved around when he was growing
up. Like Besso, he is married, but he
hardly goes anywhere with his wife.
Even at home, he sneaks away from
Mileva in the middle of the night and
goes to the kitchen to calculate long
pages of equations, which he shows
Besso the next day at the office.

64/203

Besso eyes his friend curiously. For
such a recluse and an introvert, this
passion for closeness seems odd.

• 8 May 1905

The world will end on 26 September
1907. Everyone knows it.
In Berne, it is just as in all cities and
towns. One year before the end, schools
close their doors. Why learn for the future, with so brief a future? Delighted
to have lessons finished forever, children play hide-and-seek in the arcades
of Kramgasse, run down Aarstrasse and
skip stones on the river, squander their

66/203

coins on peppermint and licorice. Their
parents let them do what they wish.
One month before the end, businesses close. The Bundeshaus halts its
proceedings. The federal telegraph
building on Speichergasse falls silent.
Likewise the watch factory on Laupenstrasse, the mill past the Nydegg
Bridge. What need is there for commerce and industry with so little time
left?
At the outdoor cafés on Amthausgasse, people sit and sip coffee and talk
easily of their lives. A liberation fills
the air. Just now, for example, a woman with brown eyes is speaking to her
mother about how little time they spent
together in her childhood, when the
mother worked as a seamstress. The
mother and daughter are now planning
a trip to Lucerne. They will fit two lives
into the little time remaining. At

67/203

another table, a man tells a friend
about a hated supervisor who often
made love to the man’s wife in the office coatroom after hours and
threatened to fire him if he or his wife
caused any trouble. But what is there to
fear now? The man has settled with the
supervisor and reconciled with his wife.
Relieved at last, he stretches his legs
and lets his eyes roam over the Alps.
At the bakery on Marktgasse, the
thick-fingered baker puts dough in the
oven and sings. These days people are
polite when they order their bread.
They smile and pay promptly, for
money is losing its value. They chat
about picnics in Fribourg, cherished
time listening to their children’s stories,
long walks in mid-afternoon. They do
not seem to mind that the world will
soon end, because everyone shares the

68/203

same fate. A world with one month is a
world of equality.
One day before the end, the streets
swirl in laughter. Neighbors who have
never spoken greet each other as
friends, strip off their clothing and
bathe in the fountains. Others dive in
the Aare. After swimming until exhausted, they lie in the thick grass
along the river and read poetry. A barrister and a postal clerk who have never before met walk arm in arm through
the Botanischer Garten, smile at the
cyclamens and asters, discuss art and
color. What do their past stations matter? In a world of one day they are
equal.
In the shadows of a side street off
Aarbergergasse, a man and a woman
lean against a wall, drink beer, and eat
smoked beef. Afterwards, she will take
him to her apartment. She is married to

69/203

someone else, but for years she has
wanted this man, and she will satisfy
her wants on this last day of the world.
A few souls gallop through the streets
doing good deeds, attempting to correct
their misdeeds of the past. Theirs are
the only unnatural smiles.
One minute before the end of the
world, everyone gathers on the grounds
of the Kunstmuseum. Men, women, and
children form a giant circle and hold
hands. No one moves. No one speaks. It
is so absolutely quiet that each person
can hear the heartbeat of the person to
his right or his left. This is the last
minute of the world. In the absolute silence a purple gentian in the garden
catches the light on the underside of its
blossom, glows for a moment, then dissolves among the other flowers. Behind
the museum, the needled leaves of a
larch gently shudder as a breeze moves

70/203

through the tree. Farther back, through
the forest, the Aare reflects sunlight,
bends the light with each ripple on its
skin. To the east, the tower of St. Vincent’s rises into sky, red and fragile, its
stonework as delicate as veins of a leaf.
And higher up, the Alps, snow-tipped,
blending white and purple, large and silent. A cloud floats in the sky. A sparrow flutters. No one speaks.
In the last seconds, it is as if everyone has leaped off Topaz Peak, holding
hands. The end approaches like approaching ground. Cool air rushes by,
bodies are weightless. The silent horizon yawns for miles. And below, the
vast blanket of snow hurtles nearer and
nearer to envelop this circle of pinkness
and life.

• 10 May 1905

It is late afternoon, and, for a brief moment, the sun nestles in a snowy hollow
of the Alps, fire touching ice. The long
slants of light sweep from the mountains, cross a restful lake, cast shadows
in a town below.
In many ways, it is a town of one
piece and a whole. Spruce and larch
and arolla pine form a gentle border
north and west, while higher up are fire
lilies,
purple
gentians,
alpine

72/203

columbines. In pastures near the town
graze cattle for making butter, cheese,
and chocolate. A little textile mill produces silks, ribbons, cotton clothes. A
church bell rings. The smell of smoked
beef fills the streets and alleyways.
On closer look, it is a town in many
pieces. One neighborhood lives in the
fifteenth century. Here, the storeys of
the rough-stone houses are joined by
outdoor stairs and galleries, while the
upper gables gape and open to the
winds. Moss grows between the stone
slabs of the roofs. Another section of
the village is a picture of the eighteenth
century. Burnt red tiles lie angled on
the straight-lined roofs. A church has
oval windows, corbeled loggias, granite
parapets. Another section holds the
present, with arcades lining every avenue, metal railings on the balconies,
façades made of smooth sandstone.

73/203

Each section of the village is fastened to
a different time.
On this late afternoon, in these few
moments while the sun is nestled in a
snowy hollow of the Alps, a person
could sit beside the lake and contemplate the texture of time. Hypothetically, time might be smooth or rough,
prickly or silky, hard or soft. But in this
world, the texture of time happens to
be sticky. Portions of towns become
stuck in some moment in history and
do not get out. So, too, individual
people become stuck in some point of
their lives and do not get free.
Just now, a man in one of the houses
below the mountains is talking to a
friend. He is talking of his school days
at the gymnasium. His certificates of
excellence in mathematics and history
hang on the walls, his sporting medals
and trophies occupy the bookshelves.

74/203

Here, on a table, is a photograph of him
as captain of the fencing team, embraced by other young men who have
since gone to university, become engineers and bankers, gotten married.
There, in the dresser, his clothes from
twenty years, the fencing blouse, the
tweed pants now too close around the
waist. The friend, who has been trying
for years to introduce the man to other
friends, nods courteously, struggles silently to breathe in the tiny room.
In another house, a man sits alone at
his table, laid out for two. Ten years
ago, he sat here across from his father,
was unable to say that he loved him,
searched through the years of his childhood for some moment of closeness, remembered the evenings that silent man
sat alone with his book, was unable to
say that he loved him, was unable to
say that he loved him. The table is set

75/203

with two plates, two glasses, two forks,
as on that last night. The man begins to
eat, cannot eat, weeps uncontrollably.
He never said that he loved him.
In another house, a woman looks
fondly at a photograph of her son,
young and smiling and bright. She
writes to him at a long-defunct address,
imagines the happy letters back. When
her son knocks at the door, she does
not answer. When her son, with his
puffy face and glassy eyes, calls up to
her window for money, she does not
hear him. When her son, with his stumbling walk, leaves notes for her, begging to see her, she throws out the
notes unopened. When her son stands
in the night outside her house, she goes
to bed early. In the morning, she looks
at his photograph, writes adoring letters to a long-defunct address.

76/203

A spinster sees the face of the young
man who loved her in the mirror of her
bedroom, on the ceiling of the bakery,
on the surface of the lake, in the sky.
The tragedy of this world is that no
one is happy, whether stuck in a time
of pain or of joy. The tragedy of this
world is that everyone is alone. For a
life in the past cannot be shared with
the present. Each person who gets stuck
in time gets stuck alone.

• 11 May 1905

Walking on the Marktgasse, one sees a
wondrous sight. The cherries in the
fruit stalls sit aligned in rows, the hats
in the millinery shop are neatly
stacked, the flowers on the balconies
are arranged in perfect symmetries, no
crumbs lie on the bakery floor, no milk
is spilled on the cobblestones of the
buttery. No thing is out of place.
When a gay party leaves a restaurant,
the tables are more tidy than before.

78/203

When a wind blows gently through the
street, the street is swept clean, the dirt
and dust transported to the edge of
town. When waves of water splash
against the shore, the shore rebuilds itself. When leaves fall from the trees,
the leaves line up like birds in V-formation. When clouds form faces, the faces
stay. When a pipe lets smoke into a
room, the soot drifts toward a corner of
the room, leaving clear air. Painted balconies exposed to wind and rain become brighter in time. The sound of
thunder makes a broken vase reform itself, makes the fractured shards leap up
to the precise positions where they fit
and bind. The fragrant odor of a
passing cinnamon cart intensifies, not
dissipates, with time.
Do these happenings seem strange?
In this world, the passage of time
brings increasing order. Order is the

79/203

law of nature, the universal trend, the
cosmic direction. If time is an arrow,
that arrow points toward order. The future is pattern, organization, union, intensification; the past, randomness,
confusion, disintegration, dissipation.
Philosophers have argued that
without a trend toward order, time
would lack meaning. The future would
be indistinguishable from the past.
Sequences of events would be just so
many random scenes from a thousand
novels. History would be indistinct, like
the mist slowly gathered by treetops in
evening.
In such a world, people with untidy
houses lie in their beds and wait for the
forces of nature to jostle the dust from
their windowsills and straighten the
shoes in their closets. People with untidy affairs may picnic while their calendars
become
organized,
their

80/203

appointments arranged, their accounts
balanced. Lipsticks and brushes and letters may be tossed into purses with the
satisfaction that they will sort themselves out automatically. Gardens need
never be pruned, weeds never uprooted. Desks become neat by the end
of the day. Clothes on the floor in the
evening lie on chairs in the morning.
Missing socks reappear.
If one visits a city in spring, one sees
another wondrous sight. For in springtime the populace become sick of the
order in their lives. In spring, people
furiously lay waste to their houses.
They sweep in dirt, smash chairs, break
windows. On Aarbergergasse, or any
residential avenue in spring, one hears
the sounds of broken glass, shouting,
howling, laughter. In spring, people
meet at unarranged times, burn their
appointment books, throw away their

81/203

watches, drink through the night. This
hysterical abandon continues until summer, when people regain their senses
and return to order.

• 14 May 1905

There is a place where time stands still.
Raindrops hang motionless in air. Pendulums of clocks float mid-swing. Dogs
raise their muzzles in silent howls.
Pedestrians are frozen on the dusty
streets, their legs cocked as if held by
strings. The aromas of dates, mangoes,
coriander, cumin are suspended in
space.
As a traveler approaches this place
from any direction, he moves more and

83/203

more slowly. His heartbeats grow
farther apart, his breathing slackens,
his temperature drops, his thoughts diminish, until he reaches dead center
and stops. For this is the center of time.
From this place, time travels outward
in concentric circles—at rest at the center, slowly picking up speed at greater
diameters.
Who would make pilgrimage to the
center of time? Parents with children,
and lovers.
And so, at the place where time
stands still, one sees parents clutching
their children, in a frozen embrace that
will never let go. The beautiful young
daughter with blue eyes and blond hair
will never stop smiling the smile she
smiles now, will never lose this soft
pink glow on her cheeks, will never
grow wrinkled or tired, will never get
injured, will never unlearn what her

84/203

parents have taught her, will never
think thoughts that her parents don’t
know, will never know evil, will never
tell her parents that she does not love
them, will never leave her room with
the view of the ocean, will never stop
touching her parents as she does now.
And at the place where time stands
still, one sees lovers kissing in the shadows of buildings, in a frozen embrace
that will never let go. The loved one
will never take his arms from where
they are now, will never give back the
bracelet of memories, will never journey far from his lover, will never place
himself in danger in self-sacrifice, will
never fail to show his love, will never
become jealous, will never fall in love
with someone else, will never lose the
passion of this instant in time.
One must consider that these statues
are illuminated by only the most feeble

85/203

red light, for light is diminished almost
to nothing at the center of time, its vibrations slowed to echoes in vast
canyons, its intensity reduced to the
faint glow of fireflies.
Those not quite at dead center do indeed move, but at the pace of glaciers.
A brush of the hair might take a year, a
kiss might take a thousand. While a
smile is returned, seasons pass in the
outer world. While a child is hugged,
bridges rise. While a goodbye is said,
cities crumble and are forgotten.
And those who return to the outer
world … Children grow rapidly, forget
the centuries-long embrace from their
parents, which to them lasted but
seconds. Children become adults, live
far from their parents, live in their own
houses, learn ways of their own, suffer
pain, grow old. Children curse their
parents for trying to hold them forever,

86/203

curse time for their own wrinkled skin
and hoarse voices. These now old children also want to stop time, but at another time. They want to freeze their
own children at the center of time.
Lovers who return find their friends
are long gone. After all, lifetimes have
passed. They move in a world they do
not recognize. Lovers who return still
embrace in the shadows of buildings,
but now their embraces seem empty
and alone. Soon they forget the
centuries-long promises, which to them
lasted only seconds. They become jealous even among strangers, say hateful
things to each other, lose passion, drift
apart, grow old and alone in a world
they do not know.
Some say it is best not to go near the
center of time. Life is a vessel of sadness, but it is noble to live life, and
without time there is no life. Others

87/203

disagree. They would rather have an
eternity of contentment, even if that
eternity were fixed and frozen, like a
butterfly mounted in a case.

• 15 May 1905

Imagine a world in which there is no
time. Only images.
A child at the seashore, spellbound
by her first glimpse of the ocean. A woman standing on a balcony at dawn,
her hair down, her loose sleeping silks,
her bare feet, her lips. The curved arch
of the arcade near the Zähringer Fountain on Kramgasse, sandstone and iron.
A man sitting in the quiet of his study,
holding the photograph of a woman, a

89/203

pained look on his face. An osprey
framed in the sky, its wings outstretched, the sun rays piercing
between feathers. A young boy sitting
in an empty auditorium, his heart racing as if he were on stage. Footprints
in snow on a winter island. A boat on
the water at night, its lights dim in the
distance, like a small red star in the
black sky. A locked cabinet of pills. A
leaf on the ground in autumn, red and
gold and brown, delicate. A woman
crouching in the bushes, waiting by the
house of her estranged husband, whom
she must talk to. A soft rain on a spring
day, on a walk that is the last walk a
young man will take in the place that
he loves. Dust on a windowsill. A stall
of peppers on Marktgasse, the yellow
and green and red. Matterhorn, the
jagged peak of white pushing into the
solid blue sky, the green valley and the

90/203

log cabins. The eye of a needle. Dew on
leaves, crystal, opalescent. A mother on
her bed, weeping, the smell of basil in
the air. A child on a bicycle in the
Kleine Schanze, smiling the smile of a
lifetime. A tower of prayer, tall and octagonal, open balcony, solemn, surrounded by arms. Steam rising from a
lake in early morning. An open drawer.
Two friends at a café, the lamplight illuminating one friend’s face, the other
in shadow. A cat watching a bug on the
window. A young woman on a bench,
reading a letter, tears of joy in her
green eyes. A great field, lined with cedar and spruce. Sunlight, in long angles
through the window in late afternoon.
A massive tree fallen, roots sprawling
in air, bark, limbs still green. The white
of a sailboat, with the wind behind it,
sails billowed like wings of a giant
white bird. A father and son alone at a

91/203

restaurant, the father sad and staring
down at the tablecloth. An oval window, looking out on fields of hay, a
wooden cart, cows, green and purple in
the afternoon light. A broken bottle on
the floor, brown liquid in the crevices,
a woman with red eyes. An old man in
the kitchen, cooking breakfast for his
grandson, the boy gazing out the window at a white painted bench. A worn
book lying on a table beside a dim
lamp. The white on water as a wave
breaks, blown by wind. A woman lying
on her couch with wet hair, holding the
hand of a man she will never see again.
A train with red cars, on a great stone
bridge with graceful arches, a river underneath, tiny dots that are houses in
the distance. Dust motes floating in
sunlight through a window. The thin
skin in the middle of a neck, thin
enough to see the pulse of blood

92/203

underneath. A man and woman naked,
wrapped around each other. The blue
shadows of trees in a full moon. The
top of a mountain with a strong steady
wind, the valley falling away on all
sides, sandwiches of beef and cheese. A
child wincing from his father’s slap, the
father’s lips twisted in anger, the child
not understanding. A strange face in
the mirror, gray at the temples. A
young man holding a telephone,
startled at what he is hearing. A family
photograph, the parents young and relaxed, the children in ties and dresses
and smiling. A tiny light, far through a
thicket of trees. The red at sunset. An
eggshell, white, fragile, unbroken. A
blue hat washed up on shore. Roses cut
and adrift on the river beneath the
bridge, with a château rising. Red hair
of a lover, wild, mischievous, promising. The purple petals of an iris, held

93/203

by a young woman. A room of four
walls, two windows, two beds, a table,
a lamp, two people with red faces,
tears. The first kiss. Planets caught in
space, oceans, silence. A bead of water
on the window. A coiled rope. A yellow
brush.

• 20 May 1905

A glance along the crowded booths on
Spitalgasse tells the story. The shoppers
walk hesitantly from one stall to the
next, discovering what each shop sells.
Here is tobacco, but where is mustard
seed? Here are sugar beets, but where
is cod? Here is goat’s milk, but where is
sassafras? These are not tourists in
Berne on their first visit. These are the
citizens of Berne. Not a man can remember that two days back he bought

95/203

chocolate at a shop named Ferdinand’s,
at no. 17, or beef at the Hof delicatessen, at no. 36. Each shop and its
specialty must be found anew. Many
walk with maps, directing the mapholders from one arcade to the next in
the city they have lived in all their
lives, in the street they have traveled
for years. Many walk with notebooks,
to record what they have learned while
it is briefly in their heads. For in this
world, people have no memories.
When it is time to return home at the
end of the day, each person consults his
address book to learn where he lives.
The butcher, who has made some unattractive cuts in his one day of butchery,
discovers that his home is no. 29 Nägeligasse. The stockbroker, whose
short-term memory of the market has
produced some excellent investments,
reads that he now lives at no. 89

96/203

Bundesgasse. Arriving home, each man
finds a woman and children waiting at
the door, introduces himself, helps with
the evening meal, reads stories to his
children. Likewise, each woman returning from her job meets a husband, children, sofas, lamps, wallpaper, china
patterns. Late at night, the wife and
husband do not linger at the table to
discuss the day’s activities, their children’s school, the bank account. Instead, they smile at one another, feel
the warming blood, the ache between
the legs as when they met the first time
fifteen years ago. They find their bedroom, stumble past family photographs
they do not recognize, and pass the
night in lust. For it is only habit and
memory that dulls the physical passion.
Without memory, each night is the first
night, each morning is the first morning, each kiss and touch are the first.

97/203

A world without memory is a world
of the present. The past exists only in
books, in documents. In order to know
himself, each person carries his own
Book of Life, which is filled with the
history of his life. By reading its pages
daily, he can relearn the identity of his
parents, whether he was born high or
born low, whether he did well or did
poorly in school, whether he has accomplished anything in his life.
Without his Book of Life, a person is a
snapshot, a two-dimensional image, a
ghost. In the leafy cafés on the
Brunngasshalde, one hears anguished
shrieking from a man who just read
that he once killed another man, sighs
from a woman who just discovered she
was courted by a prince, sudden boasting from a woman who has learned that
she received top honors from her university ten years prior. Some pass the

98/203

twilight hours at their tables reading
from their Books of Life; others frantically fill its extra pages with the day’s
events.
With time, each person’s Book of Life
thickens until it cannot be read in its
entirety. Then comes a choice. Elderly
men and women may read the early
pages, to know themselves as youths; or
they may read the end, to know themselves in later years.
Some have stopped reading altogether. They have abandoned the past. They
have decided that it matters not if yesterday they were rich or poor, educated
or ignorant, proud or humble, in love
or empty-hearted—no more than it
matters how a soft wind gets into their
hair. Such people look you directly in
the eye and grip your hand firmly. Such
people walk with the limber stride of
their youth. Such people have learned

99/203

how to live in a world without
memory.

• 22 May 1905

Dawn. A salmon fog floats through the
city, carried on the breath of the river.
The sun waits beyond the Nydegg
Bridge, throws its long, reddened spikes
along Kramgasse to the giant clock that
measures time, illuminates the underside of balconies. Sounds of morning
drift through the streets like the smell
of bread. A child wakes and cries for
her mother. An awning creaks quietly
as the milliner arrives at his shop on

101/203

Marktgasse. An engine whines on the
river. Two women talk softly beneath
an arcade.
As the city melts through fog and the
night, one sees a strange sight. Here an
old bridge is half-finished. There, a
house has been removed from its
foundations. Here, a street veers east
for no obvious reason. There, a bank
sits in the middle of the grocery market. The lower stained-glass windows of
St. Vincent’s portray religious themes,
the uppers switch abruptly to a picture
of the Alps in spring. A man walks
briskly toward the Bundeshaus, stops
suddenly, puts his hands to his head,
shouts excitedly, turns, and hurries in
the opposite direction.
This is a world of changed plans, of
sudden opportunities, of unexpected
visions. For in this world, time flows
not evenly but fitfully and, as

102/203

consequence, people receive fitful
glimpses of the future.
When a mother receives a sudden vision of where her son will live, she
moves her house to be near him. When
a builder sees the place of commerce in
the future, he twists his road in that
direction. When a child briefly glimpses
herself as a florist, she decides not to
attend university. When a young man
gets a vision of the woman he will
marry, he waits for her. When a solicitor catches sight of himself in the robes
of a judge in Zürich, he abandons his
job in Berne. Indeed, what sense is
there in continuing the present when
one has seen the future?
For those who have had their vision,
this is a world of guaranteed success.
Few projects are started that do not advance a career. Few trips are taken that
do not lead to the city of destiny. Few

103/203

friends are made who will not be
friends in the future. Few passions are
wasted.
For those who have not had their vision, this is a world of inactive suspense.
How can one enroll in university
without knowing one’s future occupation? How can one set up an apothecary on Marktgasse when a similar
shop might do better on Spitalgasse?
How can one make love to a man when
he may not remain faithful? Such
people sleep most of the day and wait
for their vision to come.
Thus, in this world of brief scenes
from the future, few risks are taken.
Those who have seen the future do not
need to take risks, and those who have
not yet seen the future wait for their
vision without taking risks.
Some few who have witnessed the future do all they can to refute it. A man

104/203

goes to tend the museum gardens in
Neuchâtel after he has seen himself a
barrister in Lucerne. A youth embarks
on a vigorous sailing voyage with his
father after a vision that his father will
die soon of heart trouble. A young woman allows herself to fall in love with
one man even though she has seen that
she will marry another. Such people
stand on their balconies at twilight and
shout that the future can be changed,
that thousands of futures are possible.
In time, the gardener in Neuchâtel gets
tired of his low wages, becomes a barrister in Lucerne. The father dies of his
heart, and his son hates himself for not
forcing his father to keep to his bed.
The young woman is deserted by her
lover, marries a man who will let her
have solitude with her pain.
Who would fare better in this world
of fitful time? Those who have seen the

105/203

future and live only one life? Or those
who have not seen the future and wait
to live life? Or those who deny the future and live two lives?

• 29 May 1905

A man or a woman suddenly thrust into
this world would have to dodge houses
and buildings. For all is in motion.
Houses and apartments, mounted on
wheels, go careening through Bahnhofplatz and race through the narrows of
Marktgasse, their occupants shouting
from second-floor windows. The Post
Bureau doesn’t remain on Postgasse,
but flies through the city on rails, like a
train. Nor does the Bundeshaus sit

107/203

quietly on Bundesgasse. Everywhere
the air whines and roars with the sound
of motors and locomotion. When a person comes out of his front door at sunrise, he hits the ground running,
catches up with his office building, hurries up and down flights of stairs, works
at a desk propelled in circles, gallops
home at the end of the day. No one sits
under a tree with a book, no one gazes
at the ripples on a pond, no one lies in
thick grass in the country. No one is
still.
Why such a fixation on speed? Because in this world time passes more
slowly for people in motion. Thus
everyone travels at high velocity, to
gain time.
The speed effect was not noticed until the invention of the internal combustion engine and the beginnings of rapid
transportation. On 8 September 1889,

108/203

Mr. Randolph Whig of Surrey took his
mother-in-law to London at high speed
in his new motor car. To his delight, he
arrived in half the expected time, a conversation having scarcely begun, and
decided to look into the phenomenon.
After his researches were published, no
one went slowly again.
Since time is money, financial considerations alone dictate that each brokerage house, each manufacturing plant,
each grocer’s shop constantly travel as
rapidly as possible, to achieve advantage over their competitors. Such buildings are fitted with giant engines of
propulsion and are never at rest. Their
motors and crankshafts roar far more
loudly than the equipment and people
inside them.
Likewise, houses are sold not just on
their size and design, but also on speed.
For the faster a house travels, the more

109/203

slowly the clocks tick inside and the
more time available to its occupants.
Depending on the speed, a person in a
fast house could gain several minutes
on his neighbors in a single day. This
obsession with speed carries through
the night, when valuable time could be
lost, or gained, while asleep. At night,
the streets are ablaze with lights, so
that passing houses might avoid collisions, which are always fatal. At night,
people dream of speed, of youth, of
opportunity.
In this world of great speed, one fact
has been only slowly appreciated. By
logical tautology, the motional effect is
all relative. Because when two people
pass on the street, each perceives the
other in motion, just as a man in a train
perceives the trees to fly by his window. Consequently, when two people
pass on the street, each sees the other’s

110/203

time flow more slowly. Each sees the
other gaining time. This reciprocity is
maddening. More maddening still, the
faster one travels past a neighbor, the
faster the neighbor appears to be
traveling.
Frustrated and despondent, some
people have stopped looking out their
windows. With the shades drawn, they
never know how fast they are moving,
how fast their neighbors and competitors are moving. They rise in the morning, take baths, eat plaited bread and
ham, work at their desks, listen to music, talk to their children, lead lives of
satisfaction.
Some argue that only the giant clock
tower on Kramgasse keeps the true
time, that it alone is at rest. Others
point out that even the giant clock is in
motion when viewed from the river
Aare, or from a cloud.

111/203

• INTERLUDE

Einstein and Besso sit at an outdoor
café on Amthausgasse. It is noon, and
Besso has talked his friend into leaving
the office and getting some air.
“You don’t look so good,” says Besso.
Einstein shrugs his shoulders, almost
embarrassed. Minutes go by, or perhaps
only seconds.
“I’m making progress,” says Einstein.
“I can tell,” says Besso, studying with
alarm the dark circles under his friend’s

113/203

eyes. It is also possible that Einstein has
stopped eating again. Besso remembers
when he looked just like Einstein does
now, but for a different reason. It was
in Zürich. Besso’s father died suddenly,
in his late forties. Besso, who had never
gotten along with his father, felt griefstricken and guilty. His studies came to
a halt. To Besso’s surprise, Einstein
brought him into his lodgings and took
care of him for a month.
Besso sees Einstein now and wishes
he could help, but of course Einstein
does not need help. To Besso, Einstein
is without pain. He seems oblivious of
his body and the world.
“I’m making progress,” Einstein says
again. “I think the secrets will come.
Did you see the paper by Lorentz I left
on your desk?”
“Ugly.”

114/203

“Yes. Ugly and ad hoc. It couldn’t
possibly be right. The electromagnetic
experiments are telling us something
much more fundamental.” Einstein
scratches his mustache and hungrily
eats the crackers on the table.
For some time the two men are silent. Besso puts four cubes of sugar in
his coffee while Einstein gazes at the
Bernese Alps, far off in the distance and
barely visible through the haze. In actuality, Einstein is looking through the
Alps, into space. He sometimes gets migraines from such farsighted vision and
must then lie on his green slip-covered
sofa with his eyes closed.
“Anna wants you and Mileva to come
for dinner next week,” says Besso. “You
can bring the baby if you need to.” Einstein nods.
Besso has another coffee, sights a
young woman at a neighboring table

115/203

and tucks in his shirt. He is almost as
disheveled as Einstein, who by this time
is staring at galaxies. Besso indeed worries about his friend, although he has
seen him this way in the past. Perhaps
the dinner will be a diversion.
“Saturday night,” says Besso.
“I’m engaged Saturday night,” Einstein says unexpectedly. “But Mileva
and Hans Albert can come.”
Besso laughs and says, “Saturday
night at eight.” He is puzzled why his
friend ever got married in the first
place. Einstein himself can’t explain it.
He once admitted to Besso that he had
hoped Mileva would at least do the
housework, but it hasn’t worked out
that way. The unmade bed, the dirty
laundry, the piles of dishes are just as
before. And there have been even more
chores with the baby.

116/203

“What did you think about the Rasmussen application?” asks Besso.
“The bottle centrifuge?”
“Yes.”
“The shaft will vibrate too much to
be useful,” says Einstein, “but the idea
is clever. I think it would work with a
flexible mounting that could find its
own rotation axis.”
Besso knows what that means. Einstein will work up a new design himself
and send it to Rasmussen without requesting payment or even acknowledgment. Often, the lucky recipients of Einstein’s suggestions don’t even know
who revises their patent applications.
Not that Einstein doesn’t enjoy recognition. A few years ago, when he saw the
issue of Annalen der Physik bearing his
first paper, he imitated a rooster for
fully five minutes.

• 2 June 1905

A mushy, brown peach is lifted from
the garbage and placed on the table to
pinken. It pinkens, it turns hard, it is
carried in a shopping sack to the grocer’s, put on a shelf, removed and
crated, returned to the tree with pink
blossoms. In this world, time flows
backward.
A withered woman sits in a chair
hardly moving, her face red and
swollen, her eyesight almost gone, her

118/203

hearing gone, her breathing scratchy
like the rustle of dead leaves on stones.
Years pass. There are few visitors.
Gradually, the woman gains strength,
eats more, loses the heavy lines in her
face. She hears voices, music. Vague
shadows gather themselves into light
and lines and images of tables, chairs,
people’s faces. The woman makes excursions from her small house, goes to
the market, occasionally visits a friend,
drinks tea at cafés in good weather. She
takes needles and yarn from the bottom
drawer of her dresser and crochets. She
smiles when she likes her work. One
day her husband, with whitened face, is
carried into her house. In hours, his
cheeks become pink, he stands stooped
over, straightens out, speaks to her. Her
house becomes their house. They eat
meals together, tell jokes, laugh. They
travel through the country, visit

119/203

friends. Her white hair darkens with
brown streaks, her voice resonates with
new tones. She goes to a retirement
party at the gymnasium, begins teaching history. She loves her students, argues with them after class. She reads
during her lunch hour and at night. She
meets friends and discusses history and
current events. She helps her husband
with the accounts at his chemist’s store,
walks with him at the foot of the mountains, makes love to him. Her skin becomes soft, her hair long and brown,
her breasts firm. She sees her husband
for the first time in the library of the
university, returns his glances. She attends classes. She graduates from the
gymnasium, with her parents and sister
crying tears of happiness. She lives at
home with her parents, spends hours
with her mother walking through the
woods by their house, helps with the

120/203

dishes. She tells stories to her younger
sister, is read to at night before bed,
grows smaller. She crawls. She nurses.
A middle-aged man walks from the
stage of an auditorium in Stockholm,
holding a medal. He shakes hands with
the president of the Swedish Academy
of Sciences, receives the Nobel Prize for
physics, listens to the glorious citation.
The man thinks briefly about the award
he is to receive. His thoughts quickly
shift twenty years to the future, when
he will work alone in a small room
with only pencil and paper. Day and
night he will work, making many false
starts, filling the trash basket with unsuccessful chains of equations and logical sequences. But some evenings he
will return to his desk knowing he has
learned things about Nature that no one
has ever known, ventured into the
forest and found light, gotten hold of

121/203

precious secrets. On those evenings, his
heart will pound as if he were in love.
The anticipation of that rush of the
blood, that time when he will be young
and unknown and unafraid of mistakes,
overpowers him now as he sits in his
chair in the auditorium in Stockholm,
at great distance from the tiny voice of
the president announcing his name.
A man stands at the graveside of his
friend, throws a handful of dirt on the
coffin, feels the cold April rain on his
face. But he does not weep. He looks
ahead to the day when his friend’s
lungs will be strong, when his friend
will be out of his bed and laughing,
when the two of them will drink ale together, go sailing, talk. He does not
weep. He waits longingly for a particular day he remembers in the future
when he and his friend will have sandwiches on a low flat table, when he will

122/203

describe his fear of growing old and unloved and his friend will nod gently,
when the rain will slide down the glass
of the window.

• 3 June 1905

Imagine a world in which people live
just one day. Either the rate of heartbeats and breathing is speeded up so
that an entire lifetime is compressed to
the space of one turn of the earth on its
axis—or the rotation of the earth is
slowed to such a low gear that one
complete revolution occupies a whole
human lifetime. Either interpretation is
valid. In either case, a man or woman
sees one sunrise, one sunset.

124/203

In this world, no one lives to witness
the change of the seasons. A person
born in December in any European
country never sees the hyacinth, the
lily, the aster, the cyclamen, the edelweiss, never sees the leaves of the
maple turn red and gold, never hears
the crickets or the warblers. A person
born in December lives his life cold.
Likewise, a person born in July never
feels a snowflake on her cheek, never
sees the crystal on a frozen lake, never
hears the squeak of boots in fresh snow.
A person born in July lives her life
warm. The variety of seasons is learned
about in books.
In this world, a life is planned by
light. A person born at sunset spends
the first half of his life in nighttime,
learns indoor trades like weaving and
watchmaking, reads a great deal, becomes intellectual, eats too much, is

125/203

frightened of the vast dark outdoors,
cultivates shadows. A person born at
sunrise learns outdoor occupations like
farming and masonry, becomes physically fit, avoids books and mental projects, is sunny and confident, is afraid
of nothing.
Both sunset and sunrise babies
flounder when the light changes. When
sunrise comes, those born at sunset are
overwhelmed by the sudden sight of
trees and oceans and mountains, are
blinded by daylight, return to their
houses and cover their windows, spend
the rest of their lives in half light.
When sunset comes, those born at sunrise wail at the disappearance of birds
in the sky, the layered shades of blue in
the sea, the hypnotic movement of
clouds. They wail and refuse to learn
the dark crafts indoors, lie on the

126/203

ground and look up and struggle to see
what they once saw.
In this world in which a human life
spans but a single day, people heed
time like cats straining to hear sounds
in the attic. For there is no time to lose.
Birth, schooling, love affairs, marriage,
profession, old age must all be fit within one transit of the sun, one modulation of light. When people pass on the
street, they tip their hats and hurry on.
When people meet at houses, they politely inquire of each other’s health and
then attend to their own affairs. When
people gather at cafés, they nervously
study the shifting of shadows and do
not sit long. Time is too precious. A life
is a moment in season. A life is one
snowfall. A life is one autumn day. A
life is the delicate, rapid edge of a closing door’s shadow. A life is a brief
movement of arms and of legs.

127/203

When old age comes, whether in
light or in dark, a person discovers that
he knows no one. There hasn’t been
time. Parents have passed away at midday or midnight. Brothers and sisters
have moved to distant cities, to seize
passing opportunities. Friends have
changed with the changing angle of the
sun. Houses, towns, jobs, lovers have
all been planned to accommodate a life
framed in one day. A person in old age
knows no one. He talks to people, but
he does not know them. His life is
scattered in fragments of conversation,
forgotten by fragments of people. His
life is divided into hasty episodes, witnessed by few. He sits at his bedside
table, listens to the sound of his running bath, and wonders whether anything exists outside of his mind. Did
that embrace from his mother really exist? Did that laughing rivalry with his

128/203

school friend really exist? Did that first
tingle of lovemaking really exist? Did
his lover exist? Where are they now?
Where are they now, as he sits at his
bedside table, listening to the sound of
his running bath, vaguely perceiving
the change in the light.

• 5 June 1905

From a description of the location and
appearance of rivers, trees, buildings,
people, all would seem common. The
Aare bends to the east, is sprinkled
with boats carrying potatoes and sugar
beets. Arolla pines dot the foothills of
the Alps, the trees’ cone-laden branches
curving upward like arms of a
candelabrum. Three-storey houses with
red-tiled roofs and dormer windows sit
quietly on Aarstrasse, overlooking the

130/203

river. Shopkeepers on Marktgasse wave
their arms at all passersby, hawking
handkerchiefs, fine watches, tomatoes,
sour bread, and fennel. The smell of
smoked beef wafts down the avenues. A
man and woman stand on their small
balcony on Kramgasse, arguing and
smiling while they argue. A young girl
walks slowly through the garden at the
Kleine Schanze. The large redwood
door of the Post Bureau opens and
closes, opens and closes. A dog barks.
But seen through the eyes of any one
person the scene is quite different. For
example, one woman sitting on the
banks of the Aare sees the boats pass by
at great speed, as if moving on skates
across ice. To another, the boats appear
sluggish, barely rounding the bend in
the whole of the afternoon. A man
standing on Aarstrasse looks at the

131/203

river to discover that the boats travel
first forwards, then backwards.
These discrepancies are repeated
elsewhere. Just now a chemist is walking back to his shop on Kochergasse,
having taken his noon meal. This is the
picture he sees: two women gallop past
him, churning their arms wildly and
talking so rapidly that he cannot understand them. A solicitor runs across the
street to an appointment somewhere,
his head jerking this way and that like
a small animal’s. A ball tossed by a
child from a balcony hurtles through
the air like a bullet, a blur barely visible. The residents of no. 82, just
glimpsed through their window, fly
through the house from one room to
the next, sit down for an instant, shovel
down a meal in one minute, disappear,
reappear. Clouds overhead come together, move apart, come together

132/203

again with the pace of successive exhales and inhales.
On the other side of the street, the
baker observes the same scene. He
notes that two women leisurely stroll
up the street, stop to talk to a solicitor,
then walk on. The solicitor goes into an
apartment at no. 82, sits down at a
table for lunch, walks to the first-floor
window where he catches a ball thrown
by a child on the street.
To yet a third person standing under
a lamppost on Kochergasse, the events
have no movement at all: two women,
a solicitor, a ball, a child, three barges,
an apartment interior are captured like
paintings in the bright summer light.
And it is similar with any sequence of
events, in this world where time is a
sense.
In a world where time is a sense, like
sight or like taste, a sequence of

133/203

episodes may be quick or may be slow,
dim or intense, salty or sweet, causal or
without cause, orderly or random, depending on the prior history of the
viewer. Philosophers sit in cafés on
Amthausgasse and argue whether time
really exists outside human perception.
Who can say if an event happens fast or
slow, causally or without cause, in the
past or the future? Who can say if
events happen at all? The philosophers
sit with half-opened eyes and compare
their aesthetics of time.
Some few people are born without
any sense of time. As consequence,
their
sense
of
place
becomes
heightened to excruciating degree.
They lie in tall grass and are questioned
by poets and painters from all over the
world. These time-deaf are beseeched
to describe the precise placement of
trees in the spring, the shape of snow

134/203

on the Alps, the angle of sun on a
church, the position of rivers, the location of moss, the pattern of birds in a
flock. Yet the time-deaf are unable to
speak what they know. For speech
needs a sequence of words, spoken in
time.

• 9 June 1905

Suppose that people live forever.
Strangely, the population of each city
splits in two: the Laters and the Nows.
The Laters reason that there is no
hurry to begin their classes at the university, to learn a second language, to
read Voltaire or Newton, to seek promotion in their jobs, to fall in love, to
raise a family. For all these things,
there is an infinite span of time. In endless
time,
all
things
can
be

136/203

accomplished. Thus all things can wait.
Indeed, hasty actions breed mistakes.
And who can argue with their logic?
The Laters can be recognized in any
shop or promenade. They walk an easy
gait and wear loose-fitting clothes.
They take pleasure in reading whatever
magazines are open, or rearranging furniture in their homes, or slipping into
conversation the way a leaf falls from a
tree. The Laters sit in cafés sipping coffee and discussing the possibilities of
life.
The Nows note that with infinite
lives, they can do all they can imagine.
They will have an infinite number of
careers, they will marry an infinite
number of times, they will change their
politics infinitely. Each person will be a
lawyer, a bricklayer, a writer, an accountant, a painter, a physician, a
farmer. The Nows are constantly

137/203

reading new books, studying new
trades, new languages. In order to taste
the infinities of life, they begin early
and never go slowly. And who can
question their logic? The Nows are easily spotted. They are the owners of the
cafés, the college professors, the doctors and nurses, the politicians, the
people who rock their legs constantly
whenever they sit down. They move
through a succession of lives, eager to
miss nothing. When two Nows chance
to meet at the hexagonal pilaster of the
Zähringer Fountain, they compare the
lives they have mastered, exchange information, and glance at their watches.
When two Laters meet at the same location, they ponder the future and follow
the parabola of the water with their
eyes.
The Nows and Laters have one thing
in common. With infinite life comes an

138/203

infinite list of relatives. Grandparents
never die, nor do great-grandparents,
great-aunts and great-uncles, greatgreat-aunts, and so on, back through
the generations, all alive and offering
advice. Sons never escape from the
shadows of their fathers. Nor do daughters of their mothers. No one ever
comes into his own.
When a man starts a business, he
feels compelled to talk it over with his
parents and grandparents and greatgrandparents, ad infinitum, to learn
from their errors. For no new enterprise
is new. All things have been attempted
by some antecedent in the family tree.
Indeed, all things have been accomplished. But at a price. For in such a
world, the multiplication of achievements is partly divided by the diminishment of ambition.

139/203

And when a daughter wants guidance
from her mother, she cannot get it undiluted. Her mother must ask her mother, who must ask her mother, and so on
forever. Just as sons and daughters cannot make decisions themselves, they
cannot turn to parents for confident advice. Parents are not the source of certainty. There are one million sources.
Where every action must be verified
one million times, life is tentative.
Bridges thrust halfway over rivers and
then abruptly stop. Buildings rise nine
stories high but have no roofs. The grocer’s stocks of ginger, salt, cod, and
beef change with every change of mind,
every consultation. Sentences go unfinished. Engagements end just days before weddings. And on the avenues and
streets, people turn their heads and
peer behind their backs, to see who
might be watching.

140/203

Such is the cost of immortality. No
person is whole. No person is free. Over
time, some have determined that the
only way to live is to die. In death, a
man or a woman is free of the weight
of the past. These few souls, with their
dear relatives looking on, dive into
Lake Constance or hurl themselves from
Monte Lema, ending their infinite lives.
In this way, the finite has conquered
the infinite, millions of autumns have
yielded to no autumns, millions of
snowfalls have yielded to no snowfalls,
millions of admonitions have yielded to
none.

• 10 June 1905

Suppose that time is not a quantity but
a quality, like the luminescence of the
night above the trees just when a rising
moon has touched the treeline. Time
exists, but it cannot be measured.
Just now, on a sunny afternoon, a
woman stands in the middle of the
Bahnhofplatz, waiting to meet a particular man. Some time ago, he saw her
on the train to Fribourg, was entranced,
and asked to take her to the Grosse

142/203

Schanze gardens. From the urgency in
his voice and the look in his eyes, the
woman knew that he meant soon. So
she waits for him, not impatiently,
passing the time with a book. Some
time later, perhaps on the following
day, he arrives, they lock arms, walk to
the gardens, stroll by the groupings of
tulips, roses, martagon lilies, alpine
columbines, sit on a white cedar bench
for an unmeasurable time. Evening
comes, marked by a change in the light,
a reddening of the sky. The man and
woman follow a winding path of small
white stones to a restaurant on a hill.
Have they been together a lifetime, or
only a moment? Who can say?
Through the leaded windows of the
restaurant, the mother of the man spots
him sitting with the woman. She wrings
her hands and whines, for she wants
her son at home. She sees him as a

143/203

child. Has any time passed since he
lived at home, played catch with his
father, rubbed his mother’s back before
bed? The mother sees that boyish
laugh, caught in candlelight through
the leaded windows of the restaurant,
and she is certain that no time has
passed, that her son, her child, belongs
with her at home. She waits outside,
wringing her hands, while her son
grows older quickly in the intimacy of
this evening, of this woman he has met.
Across the street, on Aarbergergasse,
two men argue about a shipment of
pharmaceuticals. The receiver is angry
because the pharmaceuticals, which
have a short shelf life, have arrived
aged and inactive. He expected them
long ago and, in fact, has been waiting
for them at the train station for some
time, through comings and goings of
the gray lady at no. 27 Spitalgasse,

144/203

through many patterns of light on the
Alps, through alterations of the air from
warm to cool to wet. The sender, a
short fat man with a mustache, is insulted. He crated the chemicals at his factory in Basle as soon as he heard the
awnings open over the market. He carried the boxes to the train while the
clouds were still in the same positions
as when the contract was signed. What
more could he do?
In a world where time cannot be
measured, there are no clocks, no calendars, no definite appointments.
Events are triggered by other events,
not by time. A house is begun when
stone and lumber arrive at the building
site. The stone quarry delivers stone
when the quarryman needs money. The
barrister leaves home to argue a case at
the Supreme Court when his daughter
makes a joke about his growing bald.

145/203

Education at the gymnasium in Berne is
concluded when the student has passed
his examinations. Trains leave the station at the Bahnhofplatz when the cars
are filled with passengers.
In a world where time is a quality,
events are recorded by the color of the
sky, the tone of the boatman’s call on
the Aare, the feeling of happiness or
fear when a person comes into a room.
The birth of a baby, the patent of an invention, the meeting of two people are
not fixed points in time, held down by
hours and minutes. Instead, events
glide through the space of the imagination, materialized by a look, a desire.
Likewise, the time between two events
is long or short, depending on the background of contrasting events, the intensity of illumination, the degree of
light and shadow, the view of the
participants.

146/203

Some people attempt to quantify
time, to parse time, to dissect time.
They are turned to stone. Their bodies
stand frozen on street corners, cold,
hard, and heavy. In time, these statues
are taken to the quarryman, who cuts
them up evenly in equal sections and
sells them for houses when he needs
the money.

• 11 June 1905

On the corner of Kramgasse and Theaterplatz there is a small outdoor café
with six blue tables and a row of blue
petunias in the chef’s window box, and
from this café one can see and hear the
whole of Berne. People drift through
the arcades on Kramgasse, talking and
stopping to buy linen or wristwatches
or cinnamon; a group of eight-year-old
boys, let out for morning recess from
the grammar school on Kochergasse,

148/203

follow their teacher in single file
through the streets to the banks of the
Aare; smoke rises lazily from a mill just
over the river; water gurgles from the
spouts of the Zähringer Fountain; the
giant clock tower on Kramgasse strikes
the quarter hour.
If, for the moment, one ignores the
sounds and the smells of the city, a remarkable sight will be seen. Two men
at the corner of Kochergasse are trying
to part but cannot, as if they would
never see each other again. They say
goodbye, start to walk in opposite directions, then hurry back together and
embrace. Nearby, a middle-aged woman sits on the stone rim of a fountain,
weeping quietly. She grips the stone
with her yellow stained hands, grips it
so hard that the blood rushes from her
hands, and she stares in despair at the
ground. Her loneliness has the

149/203

permanence of a person who believes
she will never see other people again.
Two women in sweaters stroll down
Kramgasse, arm in arm, laughing with
such abandon that they could be thinking no thought of the future.
In fact, this is a world without future.
In this world, time is a line that terminates at the present, both in reality and
in the mind. In this world, no person
can imagine the future. Imagining the
future is no more possible than seeing
colors beyond violet: the senses cannot
conceive what may lie past the visible
end of the spectrum. In a world without
future, each parting of friends is a
death. In a world without future, each
loneliness is final. In a world without
future, each laugh is the last laugh. In a
world without future, beyond the
present lies nothingness, and people

150/203

cling to the present as if hanging from a
cliff.
A person who cannot imagine the future is a person who cannot contemplate the results of his actions. Some
are thus paralyzed into inaction. They
lie in their beds through the day, wide
awake but afraid to put on their
clothes. They drink coffee and look at
photographs. Others leap out of bed in
the morning, unconcerned that each action leads into nothingness, unconcerned that they cannot plan out their
lives. They live moment to moment,
and each moment is full. Still others
substitute the past for the future. They
recount each memory, each action
taken, each cause and effect, and are
fascinated by how events have delivered them to this moment, the last
moment of the world, the termination
of the line that is time.

151/203

In the little café with the six outdoor
tables and the row of petunias, a young
man sits with his coffee and pastry. He
has been idly observing the street. He
has seen the two laughing women in
sweaters, the middle-aged woman at
the fountain, the two friends who keep
repeating goodbyes. As he sits, a dark
rain cloud makes its way over the city.
But the young man remains at his table.
He can imagine only the present, and at
this moment the present is a blackening
sky but no rain. As he sips the coffee
and eats the pastry, he marvels at how
the end of the world is so dark. Still
there is no rain, and he squints at his
paper in the dwindling light, trying to
read the last sentence that he will read
in his life. Then, rain. The young man
goes inside, takes off his wet jacket,
marvels at how the world ends in rain.
He discusses food with the chef, but he

152/203

is not waiting for the rain to stop because he is not waiting for anything. In
a world without future, each moment is
the end of the world. After twenty
minutes, the storm cloud passes, the
rain stops, and the sky brightens. The
young man returns to his table, marvels
that the world ends in sunlight.

• 15 June 1905

In this world, time is a visible dimension. Just as one may look off in the
distance and see houses, trees, mountain peaks that are landmarks in space,
so one may look out in another direction and see births, marriages, deaths
that are signposts in time, stretching off
dimly into the far future. And just as
one may choose whether to stay in one
place or run to another, so one may
choose his motion along the axis of

154/203

time. Some people fear traveling far
from a comfortable moment. They remain close to one temporal location,
barely crawling past a familiar occasion. Others gallop recklessly into the
future, without preparation for the rapid sequence of passing events.
At the polytechnic in Zürich, a young
man and his mentor sit in a small library, quietly discussing the young
man’s doctoral work. It is the month of
December, and a fire blazes in the fireplace with the white marble mantel.
The young man and his teacher sit in
pleasant oak chairs next to a round
table, strewn with pages of calculations. The research has been difficult.
Each month for the past eighteen
months, the young man has met his
professor here in this room, asked his
professor for guidance and hope, gone
away to work for another month, come

155/203

back with new questions. The professor
has always provided answers. Again
today, the professor explains. While his
teacher is speaking, the young man
gazes out the window, studies the way
snow clings to the spruce beside the
building, wonders how he will manage
on his own once he has received his degree. Sitting in his chair, the young
man steps hesitantly forward in time,
only minutes into the future, shudders
at the cold and uncertainty. He pulls
back. Much better to stay in this moment, beside the warm fire, beside the
warm help of his mentor. Much better
to stop movement in time. And so, on
this day in the small library, the young
man remains. His friends pass by, look
in briefly to see him stopped in this moment, continue on to the future at their
own paces.

156/203

At no. 27 Viktoriastrasse, in Berne, a
young woman lies on her bed. The
sounds of her parents’ fighting drift up
to her room. She covers her ears and
stares at a photograph on her table, a
photograph of herself as a child, squatting at the beach with her mother and
father. Against one wall of her room
stands a chestnut bureau. A porcelain
wash basin sits on the bureau. The blue
paint on the wall is peeling and
cracked. At the foot of her bed, a suitcase is open, half-filled with clothes.
She stares at the photograph, then out
into time. The future is beckoning. She
makes up her mind. Without finishing
her packing, she rushes out of her
house, this point of her life, rushes
straight to the future. She rushes past
one year ahead, five years, ten years,
twenty years, finally puts on the brakes.
But she is moving so fast that she

157/203

cannot slow down until she is fifty
years old. Events have raced by her vision and barely been seen. A balding solicitor who got her pregnant and then
left. A blur of a year at the university. A
small apartment in Lausanne for some
period of time. A girlfriend in Fribourg.
Scattered visits to her parents gone
gray. The hospital room where her
mother died. The damp apartment in
Zürich, smelling of garlic, where her
father died. A letter from her daughter,
living somewhere in England.
The woman catches her breath. She
is fifty years old. She lies on her bed,
tries to remember her life, stares at a
photograph of herself as a child, squatting at the beach with her mother and
father.

• 17 June 1905

It is Tuesday morning in Berne. The
thick-fingered baker on Marktgasse is
shouting at a woman who has not paid
her last bill, is flailing his arms while
she quietly puts her new purchase of
zwieback in her bag. Outside the
baker’s shop, a child is skating after a
ball tossed from a first-floor window,
the child’s skates clicking on the stone
street. On the east end of Marktgasse,
where the street joins Kramgasse, a

159/203

man and woman are standing close in
the shadow of an arcade. Two men are
walking past with newspapers under
their arms. Three hundred meters to
the south, a warbler is flying lazily over
the Aare.
The world stops.
The baker’s mouth halts in mid-sentence. The child floats in mid-stride, the
ball hangs in the air. The man and woman become statues under the arcade.
The two men become statues, their conversation stopped as if the needle of a
phonograph had been lifted. The bird
freezes in flight, fixed like a stage prop
suspended over the river.
A microsecond later, the world starts
again.
The baker continues his harangue as
if nothing had happened. So, too, the
child races after the ball. The man and
woman press closer together. The two

160/203

men continue debating the rise in the
beef market. The bird flaps its wings
and continues its arc over the Aare.
Minutes later, the world stops again.
Then starts again. Stops. Starts.
What world is this? In this world
time is not continuous. In this world
time is discontinuous. Time is a stretch
of nerve fibers: seemingly continuous
from a distance but disjointed close up,
with microscopic gaps between fibers.
Nervous action flows through one segment of time, abruptly stops, pauses,
leaps through a vacuum, and resumes
in the neighboring segment.
So tiny are the disconnections in time
that a single second would have to be
magnified and dissected into one thousand parts and each of those parts into
one thousand parts before a single missing part of time could be spotted. So
tiny are the disconnections in time that

161/203

the gaps between segments are practically imperceptible. After each restart of
time, the new world looks just like the
old. The positions and motions of
clouds appear exactly the same, the trajectories of birds, the flow of conversations, thoughts.
The segments of time fit together almost perfectly, but not quite perfectly.
On occasion, very slight displacements
occur. For example, on this Tuesday in
Berne, a young man and a young woman, in their late twenties, stand beneath a street lamp on Gerberngasse.
They met one month ago. He loves her
desperately, but he has already been
crushed by a woman who left him
without warning, and he is frightened
of love. He must be sure with this woman. He studies her face, pleads silently for her true feelings, searches for
the smallest sign, the slightest

162/203

movement of her brow, the vaguest
reddening of her cheeks, the moistness
of her eyes.
In truth, she loves him back, but she
cannot put her love in words. Instead,
she smiles at him, unaware of his fear.
As they stand beneath the street lamp,
time stops and restarts. Afterwards, the
tilt of their heads is precisely the same,
the cycle of their heartbeats shows no
alteration. But somewhere in the deep
pools of the woman’s mind, a dim
thought has appeared that was not
there before. The young woman
reaches for this new thought, into her
unconscious, and as she does so a gossamer vacancy crosses her smile. This
slight hesitation would be invisible to
any but the closest scrutiny, yet the urgent young man has noticed it and
taken it for his sign. He tells the young
woman that he cannot see her again,

163/203

returns to his small apartment on
Zeughausgasse, decides to move to
Zürich and work in his uncle’s bank.
The young woman walks slowly home
from the lamppost on Gerberngasse and
wonders why the young man did not
love her.

• INTERLUDE

Einstein and Besso sit in a small fishing
boat at anchor in the river. Besso is eating a cheese sandwich while Einstein
puffs on his pipe and slowly reels in a
lure.
“Do you usually catch anything here,
smack in the middle of the Aare?” asks
Besso, who has never been fishing with
Einstein before.
“Never,” answers Einstein, who continues to cast.

165/203

“Maybe we should move closer to the
shore, by those reeds.”
“We could,” says Einstein. “Never
caught anything there, either. You got
another sandwich in that bag?”
Besso hands Einstein a sandwich and
a beer. He feels slightly guilty for asking his friend to take him along on this
Sunday afternoon. Einstein was planning to go fishing alone, in order to
think.
“Eat,” says Besso. “You need a break
from pulling in all those fish.”
Einstein lowers his lure into Besso’s
lap and starts eating. For a while, the
two friends are silent. A small red skiff
passes by, making waves, and the fishing boat bobs up and down.
After lunch, Einstein and Besso remove the seats in the boat and lie on
their backs, looking up at the sky. For
today, Einstein has given up fishing.

166/203

“What shapes do you see in the
clouds, Michele?” asks Einstein.
“I see a goat chasing a man who is
frowning.”
“You are a practical man, Michele.”
Einstein gazes at the clouds but is
thinking of his project. He wants to tell
Besso about his dreams, but he cannot
bring himself to do it.
“I think you will succeed with your
theory of time,” says Besso. “And when
you do, we will go fishing and you will
explain it to me. When you become
famous, you’ll remember that you told
me first, here in this boat.”
Einstein laughs, and the clouds rock
back and forth with his laughter.

• 18 June 1905

Emanating from a cathedral in the center of Rome, a line of ten thousand
people stretches radially outward, like
the hand of a giant clock, out to the
edge of the city, and beyond. Yet these
patient pilgrims are directed inward,
not out. They are waiting their turn to
enter the Temple of Time. They are
waiting to bow to the Great Clock.
They have traveled long distances, even
from other countries, to visit this

168/203

shrine. Now they stand quietly as the
line creeps forward through immaculate streets. Some read from their prayer books. Some hold children. Some eat
figs or drink water. And as they wait,
they seem oblivious to the passage of
time. They do not glance at their
watches, for they do not own watches.
They do not listen for chimes from a
clock tower, for clock towers do not exist. Watches and clocks are forbidden,
except for the Great Clock in the
Temple of Time.
Inside the temple, twelve pilgrims
stand in a circle around the Great
Clock, one pilgrim for each hour mark
on the huge configuration of metal and
glass. Inside their circle, a massive
bronze pendulum swings from a height
of twelve meters, glints in the candlelight. The pilgrims chant with each
period of the pendulum, chant with

169/203

each measured increment of time. The
pilgrims chant with each minute subtracted from their lives. This is their
sacrifice.
After an hour by the Great Clock, the
pilgrims depart and another twelve file
through the tall portals. This procession
continued for centuries.
Long ago, before the Great Clock,
time was measured by changes in heavenly bodies: the slow sweep of stars
across the night sky, the arc of the sun
and variation in light, the waxing and
waning of the moon, tides, seasons.
Time was measured also by heartbeats,
the rhythms of drowsiness and sleep,
the recurrence of hunger, the menstrual
cycles of women, the duration of loneliness. Then, in a small town in Italy, the
first mechanical clock was built. People
were spellbound. Later they were horrified. Here was a human invention that

170/203

quantified the passage of time, that laid
ruler and compass to the span of desire,
that measured out exactly the moments
of a life. It was magical, it was unbearable, it was outside natural law. Yet the
clock could not be ignored. It would
have to be worshipped. The inventor
was persuaded to build the Great Clock.
Afterwards, he was killed and all other
clocks were destroyed. Then the pilgrimages began.
In some ways, life goes on the same
as before the Great Clock. The streets
and alleyways of towns sparkle with
the laughter of children. Families gather in good times to eat smoked beef and
drink beer. Boys and girls glance shyly
at each other across the atrium of an
arcade. Painters adorn houses and
buildings with their paintings. Philosophers contemplate. But every breath,
every crossing of legs, every romantic

171/203

desire has a slight gnarliness that gets
caught in the mind. Every action, no
matter how little, is no longer free. For
all people know that in a certain
cathedral in the center of Rome swings
a massive bronze pendulum exquisitely
connected to ratchets and gears, swings
a massive bronze pendulum that measures out their lives. And each person
knows that at some time he must confront the loose intervals of his life, must
pay homage to the Great Clock. Each
man and woman must journey to the
Temple of Time.
Thus, on any day, at any hour of any
day, a line of ten thousand stretches radially outward from the center of
Rome, a line of pilgrims waiting to bow
to the Great Clock. They stand quietly,
reading prayer books, holding their
children. They stand quietly, but
secretly they seethe with their anger.

172/203

For they must watch measured that
which should not be measured. They
must watch the precise passage of
minutes and decades. They have been
trapped by their own inventiveness and
audacity. And they must pay with their
lives.

• 20 June 1905

In this world, time is a local phenomenon. Two clocks close together tick at
nearly the same rate. But clocks separated by distance tick at different rates,
the farther apart the more out of step.
What holds true for clocks holds true
also for the rate of heartbeats, the pace
of inhales and exhales, the movement
of wind in tall grass. In this world, time
flows at different speeds in different
locations.

174/203

Since commerce requires a temporal
union, commerce between cities does
not exist. The separations between cities are too great. For if the time needed
to count a thousand Swiss franc notes is
ten minutes in Berne and one hour in
Zürich, how can the two cities do business together? In consequence, each
city is alone. Each city is an island.
Each city must grow its own plums and
its cherries, each city must raise its own
cattle and pigs, each city must build its
own mills. Each city must live on its
own.
On occasion, a traveler will venture
from one city to another. Is he perplexed? What took seconds in Berne
might take hours in Fribourg, or days in
Lucerne. In the time for a leaf to fall in
one place, a flower could bloom in another. In the duration of a thunderclap
in one place, two people could fall in

175/203

love in another. In the time that a boy
grows into a man, a drop of rain might
slide down a windowpane. Yet the traveler is unaware of these discrepancies.
As he moves from one timescape to the
next, the traveler’s body adjusts to the
local movement of time. If every heartbeat, every swing of a pendulum, every
unfolding of wings of a cormorant are
all harmonized together, how could a
traveler know that he has passed to a
new zone of time? If the pace of human
desires stays proportionally the same
with the motion of waves on a pond,
how could the traveler know that
something has changed?
Only when the traveler communicates with the city of departure does he
realize he has entered a new domain of
time. Then he learns that while he has
been gone his clothing shop has wildly
prospered and diversified, or his

176/203

daughter has lived her life and grown
old, or perhaps his neighbor’s wife has
just completed the song she was singing
when he left his front gate. It is then
the traveler learns that he is cut off in
time, as well as in space. No traveler
goes back to his city of origin.
Some people delight in isolation.
They argue that their city is the grandest of cities, so why would they want
communion with other cities. What silk
could be softer than the silk from their
own factories? What cows could be
stronger than the cows in their own
pastures? What watches could be finer
than the watches in their own shops?
Such people stand on their balconies at
morning, as the sun rises over the
mountains, and never look past the outskirts of town.
Others want contact. They endlessly
question the rare traveler who wanders

177/203

into their city, ask him about places he
has been, ask him about the color of
other sunsets, the height of people and
animals, the languages spoken, the customs of courtship, inventions. In time,
one of the curious sets out to see for
himself, leaves his city to explore other
cities, becomes a traveler. He never
returns.
This world of the locality of time,
this world of isolation yields a rich
variety of life. For without the blending
of cities, life can develop in a thousand
different ways. In one city, people may
live together closely, in another far
apart. In one city, people may dress
modestly, in another they may wear no
clothes at all. In one city, people may
mourn the death of enemies, in another
they may have neither enemies nor
friends. In one city, people may walk,
in another they may ride in vehicles of

178/203

strange invention. Such variety and
more exists in regions only one hundred kilometers apart. Just beyond a
mountain, just beyond a river lies a different life. Yet these lives do not speak
to each other. These lives do not share.
These lives do not nurture each other.
The abundances caused by isolation are
stifled by the same isolation.

• 22 June 1905

It is graduation day at Agassiz Gymnasium. One hundred twenty-nine boys in
white shirts and brown ties stand on
marble steps and fidget in the sun while
the headmaster reads out their names.
On the front lawn, parents and relatives
listen halfheartedly, stare at the
ground, doze in their chairs. The valedictorian delivers his address in a
monotone. He smiles weakly when
handed his medal and drops it in a

180/203

bush after the ceremony. No one congratulates him. The boys, their mothers,
fathers, sisters walk listlessly to houses
on Amthausgasse and Aarstrasse, or to
the waiting benches near the Bahnhofplatz, sit after the noon meal, play
cards to pass time, nap. Dress clothes
are folded and put away for another occasion. At the end of the summer, some
of the boys go to university in Berne or
in Zürich, some work in their fathers’
businesses, some travel to Germany or
France in search of a job. These passages take place indifferently, mechanically, like the back-and-forth swing of
a pendulum, like a chess game in which
each move is forced. For in this world,
the future is fixed.
This is a world in which time is not
fluid, parting to make way for events.
Instead, time is a rigid, bonelike structure, extending infinitely ahead and

181/203

behind, fossilizing the future as well as
the past. Every action, every thought,
every breath of wind, every flight of
birds is completely determined, forever.
In the performing hall of the
Stadttheater, a ballerina moves across
the stage and takes to the air. She
hangs for a moment and then alights on
the floor. Saut, batterie, saut. Legs cross
and flutter, arms unfold into an open
arch. Now she prepares for a pirouette,
right leg moving back to fourth position, pushing off on one foot, arms
coming in to speed the turn. She is precision. She is a clock. In her mind,
while she dances, she thinks she should
have floated a little on one leap, but
she cannot float because her movements are not hers. Every interaction of
her body with floor or with space is
predetermined to a billionth of an inch.
There is no room to float. To float

182/203

would indicate a slight uncertainty,
while there is no uncertainty. And so
she moves around the stage with clocklike inevitability, makes no unexpected
leaps or dares, touches down precisely
on the chalk, does not dream of unplanned cabrioles.
In a world of fixed future, life is an
infinite corridor of rooms, one room lit
at each moment, the next room dark
but prepared. We walk from room to
room, look into the room that is lit, the
present moment, then walk on. We do
not know the rooms ahead, but we
know we cannot change them. We are
spectators of our lives.
The chemist who works at the pharmaceutical on Kochergasse walks
through the town on his afternoon
break. He stops at the shop selling
clocks on Marktgasse, buys a sandwich
at the bakery next door, continues

183/203

toward the woods and the river. He
owes his friend money but prefers to
buy himself presents. As he walks, admiring his new coat, he decides he can
pay his friend back the next year, or
perhaps never at all. And who can
blame him? In a world of fixed future,
there can be no right or wrong. Right
and wrong demand freedom of choice,
but if each action is already chosen,
there can be no freedom of choice. In a
world of fixed future, no person is responsible. The rooms are already arranged. The chemist thinks all these
thoughts as he steps along the path
through the Brunngasshalde and
breathes the moist air of the forest. He
almost permits himself a smile, so
pleased is he at his decision. He
breathes the moist air and feels oddly
free to do as he pleases, free in a world
without freedom.

• 25 June 1905

Sunday afternoon. People stroll down
Aarstrasse, wearing Sunday clothes and
full of Sunday dinner, speaking softly
beside the murmur of the river. The
shops are closed. Three women walk
down Marktgasse, stop to read advertisements, stop to peer in windows, walk
on quietly. An innkeeper scrubs his
steps, sits and reads a paper, leans
against the sandstone wall and shuts his
eyes. The streets are sleeping. The

185/203

streets are sleeping, and through the air
there floats music from a violin.
In the middle of a room with books
on tables, a young man stands and
plays his violin. He loves his violin. He
makes a gentle melody. And as he
plays, he looks out to the street below,
notices a couple close together, looks at
them with deep brown eyes, and looks
away. He stands so still. His music is
the only movement, his music fills the
room. He stands so still and thinks
about his wife and infant son, who occupy the room downstairs.
And as he plays, another man,
identical, stands in the middle of a
room and plays his violin. The other
man looks to the street below, notices a
couple close together, looks away, and
thinks about his wife and son. And as
he plays, a third man stands and plays
his violin. Indeed, there are a fourth

186/203

and fifth, there is a countless number of
young men standing in their rooms and
playing violins. There is an infinite
number of melodies and thoughts. And
this one hour, while the young men
play their violins, is not one hour but
many hours. For time is like the light
between two mirrors. Time bounces
back and forth, producing an infinite
number of images, of melodies, of
thoughts. It is a world of countless
copies.
As he thinks, the first man feels the
others. He feels their music and their
thoughts. He feels himself repeated a
thousand times, feels this room with
books repeated a thousand times. He
feels his thoughts repeated. Should he
leave his wife? What about that moment in the library of the polytechnic
when she looked at him across the
desk? What about her thick brown

187/203

hair? But what comfort has she given
him? What solitude, besides this hour
to play his violin?
He feels the others. He feels himself
repeated a thousand times, feels this
room repeated a thousand times, feels
his thoughts repeated. Which repetition
is his own, his true identity, his future
self? Should he leave his wife? What
about that moment in the library of the
polytechnic? What comfort has she given him? What solitude, besides this
hour to play his violin? His thoughts
bounce back and forth a thousand times
between each copy of himself, grow
weaker with each bounce. Should he
leave his wife? What comfort has she
given him? What solitude? His thoughts
grow dimmer with each reflection.
What comfort has she given him? What
solitude? His thoughts grow dimmer
until he hardly remembers what the

188/203

questions were, or why. What solitude?
He looks out to the empty street and
plays. His music floats and fills the
room, and when the hour passes that
was countless hours, he remembers
only music.

• 27 June 1905

Every Tuesday, a middle-aged man
brings stones from the quarry east of
Berne to the masonry on Hodlerstrasse.
He has a wife, two children grown and
gone, a tubercular brother who lives in
Berlin. He wears a gray wool coat in all
seasons, works in the quarry until after
dark, has dinner with his wife and goes
to bed, tends his garden on Sundays.
And on Tuesday mornings, he loads his
truck with stones and comes to town.

190/203

When he comes, he stops on Marktgasse to purchase flour and sugar. He
spends a half hour sitting quietly in the
back pew of St. Vincent’s. He stops at
the Post Bureau to send a letter to Berlin. And as he passes people on the
street, his eyes are on the ground. Some
people know him, try to catch his eye
or say hello. He mumbles and walks on.
Even when he delivers his stones to
Hodlerstrasse, he cannot look the mason in the eye. Instead, he looks aside,
he talks to the wall in answer to the
mason’s friendly chatter, he stands in a
corner while his stones are weighed.
Forty years ago in school, one afternoon in March, he urinated in class. He
could not hold it in. Afterwards, he
tried to stay in his chair, but the other
boys saw the puddle and made him
walk around the room, round and
round. They pointed at the wet spot on

191/203

his pants and howled. That day the sunlight looked like streams of milk as it
poured whitely through the windows
and spilled onto the floorboards of the
room. Two dozen jackets hung from
hooks beside the door. Chalk marks
stretched across the blackboard, the
names of Europe’s capitals. The desks
had swivel tops and drawers. His had
“Johann” carved in the upper right. The
air was moist and close from the steam
pipes. A clock with big red hands read
2:15. And the boys hooted at him,
hooted at him as they chased him
around the room, with the wet spot on
his pants. They hooted and called him
“bladder baby, bladder baby, bladder
baby.”
That memory has become his life.
When he wakes up in the morning, he
is the boy who urinated in his pants.
When he passes people on the street, he

192/203

knows they see the wet spot on his
pants. He glances at his pants and looks
away. When his children visit, he stays
within his room and talks to them
through the door. He is the boy who
could not hold it in.
But what is the past? Could it be, the
firmness of the past is just illusion?
Could the past be a kaleidoscope, a pattern of images that shift with each disturbance of a sudden breeze, a laugh, a
thought? And if the shift is everywhere,
how would we know?
In a world of shifting past, one morning the quarryman awakes and is no
more the boy who could not hold it in.
That afternoon in March long gone was
just another afternoon. On that afternoon forgotten, he sat in class, recited
when the teacher called him, went skating with the other boys after school.
Now he owns a quarry. He has nine

193/203

suits of clothes. He buys fine pottery for
his wife and takes long walks with her
on Sunday afternoons. He visits friends
on Amthausgasse and Aarstrasse, smiles
at them and shakes their hand. He
sponsors concerts at the Casino.
One morning he wakes up and …
As the sun rises over the city, ten
thousand people yawn and take their
toast and coffee. Ten thousand fill the
arcades of Kramgasse or go to work on
Speichergasse or take their children to
the park. Each has memories: a father
who could not love his child, a brother
who always won, a lover with a delicious kiss, a moment of cheating on a
school examination, the stillness
spreading from a fresh snowfall, the
publication of a poem. In a world of
shifting past, these memories are wheat
in wind, fleeting dreams, shapes in
clouds. Events, once happened, lose

194/203

reality, alter with a glance, a storm, a
night. In time, the past never happened.
But who could know? Who could know
that the past is not as solid as this instant, when the sun streams over the
Bernese Alps and the shopkeepers sing
as they raise their awnings and the
quarryman begins to load his truck.

• 28 June 1905

“Stop eating so much,” says the grandmother, tapping her son on the
shoulder. “You’ll die before me and
who will take care of my silver.” The
family is having a picnic on the bank of
the Aare, ten kilometers south of Berne.
The girls have finished their lunch and
chase each other around a spruce tree.
Finally dizzy, they collapse in the thick
grass, lie still for a moment, then roll
on the ground and get dizzy again. The

196/203

son and his very fat wife and the grandmother sit on a blanket, eating smoked
ham, cheese, sourdough bread with
mustard, grapes, chocolate cake. As
they eat and drink, a gentle breeze
comes over the river and they breathe
in the sweet summer air. The son takes
off his shoes and wiggles his toes in the
grass.
Suddenly a flock of birds darts overhead. The young man leaps from the
blanket and runs after them, without
taking time to put on his shoes. He disappears over the hill. Soon he is joined
by others, who have spotted the birds
from the city.
One bird has alighted in a tree. A woman climbs the trunk, reaches out to
catch the bird, but the bird jumps
quickly to a higher branch. She climbs
farther up, cautiously straddles a
branch and creeps outward. The bird

197/203

hops back to the lower branch. As the
woman hangs helplessly up in the tree,
another bird has touched down to eat
seeds. Two men sneak up behind it,
carrying a giant bell jar. But the bird is
too fast for them and takes to the air,
merging again with the flock.
Now the birds fly through the town.
The pastor at St. Vincent’s Cathedral
stands in the belfry, tries to coax the
birds into the arched window. An old
woman in the Kleine Schanze gardens
sees the birds momentarily roost in a
bush. She walks slowly toward them
with a bell jar, knows she has no
chance of entrapping a bird, drops her
jar to the ground and begins weeping.
And she is not alone in her frustration. Indeed, each man and each woman desires a bird. Because this flock
of nightingales is time. Time flutters
and fidgets and hops with these birds.

198/203

Trap one of these nightingales beneath
a bell jar and time stops. The moment
is frozen for all people and trees and
soil caught within.
In truth, these birds are rarely
caught. The children, who alone have
the speed to catch birds, have no desire
to stop time. For the children, time
moves too slowly already. They rush
from moment to moment, anxious for
birthdays and new years, barely able to
wait for the rest of their lives. The elderly desperately wish to halt time, but
are much too slow and fatigued to entrap any bird. For the elderly, time
darts by much too quickly. They yearn
to capture a single minute at the breakfast table drinking tea, or a moment
when a grandchild is stuck getting out
of her costume, or an afternoon when
the winter sun reflects off the snow and
floods the music room with light. But

199/203

they are too slow. They must watch
time jump and fly beyond reach.
On those occasions when a nightingale is caught, the catchers delight in
the moment now frozen. They savor the
precise placement of family and friends,
the facial expressions, the trapped happiness over a prize or a birth or romance, the captured smell of cinnamon
or white double violets. The catchers
delight in the moment so frozen but
soon discover that the nightingale expires, its clear, flutelike song diminishes to silence, the trapped moment
grows withered and without life.

• EPILOGUE

A clock tower strikes eight times in the
distance. The young patent clerk lifts
his head from his desk, stands up and
stretches, walks to the window.
Outside, the town is awake. A woman and her husband argue as she
hands him his lunch. A group of boys
on their way to the gymnasium on
Zeughausgasse throw a soccer ball back
and forth and talk excitedly about the
summer vacation. Two women walk

201/203

briskly toward Marktgasse carrying
empty shopping sacks.
Shortly, a senior patent officer comes
in the door, goes to his desk and begins
working, without saying a word. Einstein turns around and looks at the
clock in the corner. Three minutes after
eight. He fidgets with coins in his
pocket.
At four minutes past eight, the typist
walks in. She sees Einstein across the
room
holding
his
handwritten
manuscript and she smiles. She has
already typed several of his personal
papers for him in her spare time, and
he always gladly pays what she asks.
He is quiet, though he sometimes tells
jokes. She likes him.
Einstein gives her his manuscript, his
theory of time. It is six minutes past
eight. He walks to his desk, glances at
the stack of files, goes over to a

202/203

bookshelf, and starts to remove one of
the notebooks. He turns and walks back
to the window. The air is unusually
clear for late June. Above an apartment
building, he can see the tips of the Alps,
which are blue with white tops. Higher
up, the tiny black speck of a bird makes
slow loops in the sky.
Einstein walks back to his desk, sits
down for a moment, and then returns
to the window. He feels empty. He has
no interest in reviewing patents or talking to Besso or thinking of physics. He
feels empty, and he stares without interest at the tiny black speck and the
Alps.

@Created by PDF to ePub

